[Page 1]
A Comparative Analysis of Instruction Fine-Tuning LLMs for Financial Text
Classification
SOROURALSADAT FATEMI,University of Illinois at Chicago, USA
YUHENG HU, University of Illinois at Chicago, USA
MARYAM MOUSAVI,Arizona State University, USA
Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated impressive capabilities across diverse Natural Language Processing (NLP) tasks,
including language understanding, reasoning, and generation. However, general-domain LLMs often struggle with financial tasks due
to the technical and specialized nature of financial texts. This study investigates the efficacy of instruction fine-tuning smaller-scale
LLMs, including Mistral-7B, Llama3-8B, and Phi3-mini, to enhance their performance in financial text classification tasks. We fine-tuned
both instruction-tuned and base models across four financial classification tasks, achieving significant improvements in task-specific
performance. Furthermore, we evaluated the zero-shot capabilities of these fine-tuned models on three unseen complex financial tasks
including argument classification, deal completeness classification and causal classification. Our results indicate while base model
fine-tuning led to greater degradation, instruction-tuned models maintained more robust performance. To address this degradation,
we employed model merging techniques, integrating single-task domain-specific fine-tuned models with the base model. Using
this merging method resulted in significant enhancements in zero-shot performance, even exceeding the original model’s accuracy
on certain datasets. Our findings underscore the effectiveness of instruction fine-tuning and model merging for adapting LLMs to
specialized financial text classification tasks.
1 INTRODUCTION
Large Language Models (LLMs) have revolutionized Natural Language Processing (NLP) by demonstrating exceptional
capabilities in understanding, reasoning, and generating human-like text across various general-domain tasks. Promi-
nent models like ChatGPT [4] and GPT-4 [36] have shown impressive versatility in following general human instructions
and handling various tasks such as question answering [5], machine translation [67], information extraction [11], and
grammar correction [35]. This broad proficiency has led to growing interest in leveraging LLMs for industry-specific
applications including medicine and finance. For instance, Med-PaLM 2 [41] has been adapted for medical domains
to provide accurate responses to medical queries, while Bloomberg’s financial LLM [50] supports various NLP tasks
within the financial sector.
In the finance industry, beyond quantitative data typically analyzed, the sentiment and tone of financial reports,
earnings calls, news articles, and social media posts significantly influence investor decisions. Therefore, extracting
and analyzing relevant textual information is critical for informed investment strategies and decision-making [12, 16].
Despite the advancements of general-domain LLMs, they often fall short when applied to specialized fields like finance
due to complex terminologies and intricate concepts. This underscores a need for domain-specific adaptations to fully
realize the potential of LLMs in financial applications.
Existing research highlights the success of LLMs in financial tasks, such as predicting stock price movements
[24, 28, 53] and performing advanced financial text analytics [13, 14, 52, 54]. However, significant challenges remain,
particularly in tasks like financial relation extraction and numerical reasoning, which are crucial for making well-
informed decisions [24, 52]. The efficient market hypothesis [29] further underscores the importance of linking public
arXiv:2411.02476v1  [cs.CL]  4 Nov 2024


[Page 2]
, Fameti et al.
information with stock returns, emphasizing the need for sophisticated analysis tools [12, 16].
To address these limitations and enhance the capabilities of LLMs for specific domains, existing methods can be
broadly classified into three main approaches: in-context learning, training models from scratch on domain-specific
and general data, and fine-tuning existing models using supervised datasets. In-context learning, where LLMs generate
results based on a few demonstration examples [24], can be costly, slow in inference, and limited by the model’s context
window [2]. Moreover, these models can be sensitive to the quality and variability of the provided examples [ 21].
Training models from scratch, while effective, demands significant computational resources and vast domain-specific
and general dataset. Fine-tuning existing models is promising alternative but faces challenges such as the need for
high-quality datasets and the risk of catastrophic forgetting, where the model’s ability to perform general tasks degrades
after domain-specific fine-tuning. Techniques like model merging can help mitigate these effects.
Previous studies have demonstrated that instruction fine-tuning smaller open-source language models can signifi-
cantly enhance their performance on domain-specific tasks across various fields, such as law and medicine. In many
cases, these models have outperformed the zero-shot performance of proprietary LLMs and other state-of-the-art
models [19, 23, 33, 61, 65]. Within the finance domain, one study fine-tuned the Llama2 model for sentiment analysis,
outperforming the FinBERT [62]. Another study fine-tuned Llama2-7B and Llama2-13B models on a variety of financial
tasks, including sentiment analysis, relation extraction, question answering, and stock market prediction [54]. However,
much of the existing research has focused primarily on fine-tuning models from the Llama family. To address this
gap, we explore fine-tuning other powerful, smaller LLMs, specifically Mistral-7B, Phi-3, and Llama2-8B, across four
representative financial text classification tasks: sentiment analysis, news headline classification, relation extraction,
and hawkish-dovish classification.
One of the main challenges with fine-tuning LLMs for domain-specific tasks is the degradation of their zero-shot
performance on unseen tasks [63]. To mitigate this, previous studies have incorporated general instruction data into
domain-specific training datasets or augmented the data to reduce model sensitivity to semantically similar prompts
[27, 46, 65]. While this approach improves generalizability, it also increases computation cost and training time.
1.1 Our approach and Contributions
In our study, we aimed to address these challenges and improve the performance of smaller LLMs on specialized financial
tasks by focusing on in-context learning, fine-tuning and model merging techniques. By leveraging these approaches,
we aim to improve the performance of small LLMs in specialized financial tasks while maintaining their general
capabilities on unseen tasks. We explored the potential of Mistral-7B, Phi-3, and Llama2-8B, which are powerful yet
resource-efficient models, across seven representative financial text classification tasks:sentiment analysis, news
headline classification, relation extraction, hawkish-dovish classification, argument unit classification, deal
completion classification and causal classification. These models were selected to address the challenge of adapting
LLMs to complex, domain-specific tasks while managing computational costs. By concentrating on smaller models, we
aim to provide a more scalable solution that balances performance with efficiency in the financial sector.
We first assessed the in-context learning capabilities of selected models on the specified tasks. We experimented with
one-shot, five-shot and ten-shot examples and compared them against zero-shot performance of the models. The results


[Page 3]
A Comparative Analysis of Instruction Fine-Tuning LLMs for Financial Text Classification ,
shows some improvement in the model prediction when providing the in-context examples. However, after a certain
number of examples, increasing the number of demonstrations led to performance degradation in small instruct models.
Next, we fine-tuned the models to improve task performance while maintaining the generalization capabilities of the
models. Both base and instruction-tuned models were fine-tuned using the same set of finance-specific training data. Our
approach differs from previous work by focusing on instruction-tuned models that had already been exposed to a diverse
range of tasks, reducing the need for extensive general datasets. The results show that fine-tuning both base and instruct
models leads to substantial improvements over zero-shot performance, including when compared to proprietary models
such as GPT-4. In particular, the models excelled in tasks like relation extraction and hawkish-dovish classification,
which are typically underrepresented in the pre-training data of most LLMs. We then evaluated the performance of
fine-tuned models on three different unseen tasks and we observed that base fine-tuned models exhibited greater
performance degradation compared to instruct fine-tuned models. These findings indicate that instruct fine-tuned
models provide a more robust foundation for further fine-tuning on domain-specific tasks.
To further address the performance degradation on unseen tasks, we leveraged the merging techniques using
MergeKit framework. This allowed us to merge single-task fine-tuned models with the vanilla instruction model,
helping to preserve the models’ zero-shot generalization abilities while enhancing their task-specific performance.
Notably, the Mistral-7B model demonstrated results that were either on par with, or surpassed, its original zero-shot
performance, highlighting the effectiveness of model merging techniques in maintaining robust performance across
tasks.
Our key contributions are as follows:
• We experimented with in-context learning of small LLMs, including Llama3-8B, Mistral-7B, and Phi-3-mini,
on four financial domain datasets. Our findings indicate that increasing the number of examples degrades the
performance of small instruct models.
• We fine-tuned smaller models such as Mistral-7B, Phi-3, and Llama2-8B on four key financial text classification
tasks, showcasing the feasibility of using smaller, more efficient models for domain-specific financial tasks.
• We demonstrated significant performance improvements across all models by fine-tuning both base and instruct
models, with the instruct models proving more robust in handling complex financial tasks.
• We introduced model merging techniques via the MergeKit framework, which learned the domain specific
knowledge effectively, while mitigated the typical degradation of zero-shot performance on unseen tasks, notably
improving results for the Mistral-7B model.
• We highlight the advantages of fine-tuning smaller LLMs on specialized financial datasets, achieving strong
performance without the extensive resource requirements typically associated with larger models.
2 RELATED WORK
This section reviews recent studies that apply Large Language Models (LLMs) to domain-specific tasks. Prior to the
rise of LLM-focused research, many studies concentrated on utilizing BERT, an encoder-only model, for improving
performance through fine-tuning, developing self-attentive mechanisms, and incorporating multiple lexical knowledge
sources to better capture semantic context, specially in the finance domain [ 10, 34, 39, 51, 59]. However, this paper


[Page 4]
, Fameti et al.
focuses on instruction fine-tuning, which leverages decoder-only LLM models optimized for generating text based on
preceding context.
2.1 Training from Scratch
Training domain-specific language models from scratch remains a straightforward method for achieving domain
adaptation. BloombergGPT is an early example of large language models built specifically for the financial domain.
It was trained on a blend of financial and general corpora, and showing high performance on financial tasks [ 50].
Similarly, other studies transformed large-scale raw domain-specific corpora into reading comprehension task, allowing
LLMs to acquire domain knowledge and improve prompting capabilities [6]. However, training from scratch demands
substantial computational resources and large dataset, making it less practical than other methods such as In-Context
Learning (ICL) or fine-tuning, which require fewer resources [56].
2.2 In-context Learning
Scaling model size and leveraging extensive pre-training data have unlocked emergent capabilities in LLMs, such as
In-Context Learning (ICL) [3, 8, 49]. This allows models to learn from a few in-context provided instructed examples
without requiring full retraining [37]. Proprietary models like ChatGPT and GPT-4 have demonstrated strong perfor-
mance across various general tasks [43, 64, 66]. However, when applied to specialized domains like finance and social
media, their performance often lags behind that of fine-tuned models like BERT, particularly for tasks requiring deeper
semantic understanding [48]. Increasing the number of in-context examples can also lead to performance degradation
in certain domain-specific tasks [64].
In finance, Li et al. [24] examined the performance of ChatGPT and GPT-4 across several financial text analytics tasks.
Another study enhanced financial sentiment analysis using semi-supervised learning and Chain-of-Thought reasoning
to improve accuracy with minimal prompting [9]. Although these models outperform some domain-specific models in
certain tasks, they struggle with tasks like named-entity recognition and headline classification, which require deeper
semantic analysis. These limitations motivate our research into the performance of open-source instruction-tuned
models in the finance domain.
2.3 Instruction Fine-tuning
Instruction fine-tuning is a resource-efficient approach for adapting LLMs to specific tasks. It allows models to adjust to
domain-specific needs without the need for extensive retraining [37, 63]. This technique has proven effective across
domains like medicine, law, and social sciences, where fine-tuned models often outperform general-purpose models
like GPT-4 [7, 19, 23, 27, 60, 65].
In the finance domain, several studies have applied instruction fine-tuning to models like LLaMA using financial
datasets. Xie et al. [ 54] fine-tuned LLaMA on 136k task-specific instruction samples, including sentiment analysis,
named-entity recognition, question answering, and stock movement prediction, achieving results comparable to GPT-4.
Yang et al. [56] developed an end-to-end framework for training and deploying FinLLMs in the finance sector using
Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) to fine-tune LLaMA and ChatGLM models using 50k data points from news articles,
social media posts, Sec fillings and stock movement predictions. Zhang et al. [61] also applied fine-tuning to financial


[Page 5]
A Comparative Analysis of Instruction Fine-Tuning LLMs for Financial Text Classification ,
classification tasks, focusing on sentiment analysis.
However, these studies have mainly focused on fine-tuning the LLaMA model, often overlooking other smaller,
open-source LLMs. Moreover, these studies focus on fine-tuning base models which typically require large supervised
instruct-created datasets [45]. To overcome data scarcity limitations, Xie et al. [54] augmented the data by multiple
instructions per sample to enhance training, though this increased computational costs. Recently released instruction-
tuned models, already trained on diverse tasks, may offer a more efficient alternative by bypassing the need for such
extensive data augmentation. To address this research gap, our study fine-tunes both base and instruction-tuned variants
of three robust small LLMs (Llama3, Mistral-7B, and Phi-3) on four financial classification tasks using a consistent
amount of training data.
2.4 Merging Models
In addition, previous studies show that fine-tuning on domain-specific data can degrade performance on unseen
tasks. To address this, some researchers in non-financial domains have incorporated both generic and domain-specific
instruction data, but this adds significant computational costs [ 46, 47]. In the finance domain, [54, 61] have shown
that fine-tuning improves performance on trained datasets, however, these studies have not examined performance
on unseen finance-related tasks. To fill this gap, we evaluate the performance of fine-tuned models on three unseen
finance-related datasets. In contrast, our study takes a more efficient approach: rather than augmenting training data
with generic datasets, we fine-tuned instruction models on each task individually and applied the MergeKit framework
to combine the single-task fine-tuned models with the vanilla instruction model, thus preserving performance on
unseen tasks while minimizing computational overhead.
Dataset Used for Task # Labels Data size Example labels
FPB Train, test of ICL, FT Sentiment analysis 3 4,845 negative, neutral,
positive
FiQA-SA Train, test of ICL, FT Sentiment analysis 3 1,173 negative, neutral,
positive
Headline-Dir Train, test of ICL, FT News headline classi-
fication
3 9,277 up, down, stable
FinRED Train, test of ICL, FT Relation extraction 29 1,070 employer, industry,
owner
FOMC Train, test of ICL, FT Hawkish-dovish
classification
3 496 hawkish, neutral,
dovish
FinArg-AUC-T1 Evaluation on un-
seen data
Argument unit clas-
sification
2 969 claim, premise
M&A Evaluation on un-
seen data
Deal completeness
classification
2 500 complete, rumour
FinCausual‘20-T1 Evaluation on un-
seen data
Causal classification 2 800 causal, noise
Table 1. Dataset size and number of labels of datasets used in our experiments


[Page 6]
, Fameti et al.
Option: Event type: phishing, databreach...
Argument type: time, purpose...
Text: Next time I will publish database
Answer:
Extract the event information in the text...
Find the phrases in the following sentence
Option: used for, part of, compare
Text: It has also been studied in the frame-work of Japanese 
information extraction
Answer:
LLM
Please list all entity words in the text...
Option: location, person, organization, else
Answer:
Text: Tom have training in a whole variety of diﬀerent missions
Sentiment Analysis
FPB, FISAQA
Finred
Relation Extraction
Headline Classiﬁcation
News Headline
(Tom, person)
(Japanese information 
extraction, used for, it)
(type: databreach, 
trigger: will push, 
time: Next time)Multi-Movie
...
Unseen
Datasets
input based on instruction
Answer
Bocchi the Rock, titleZero-Shot Evaluation
FOMC
FOMC Classiﬁcation
LLM
LLM
LLM
LLM
Answer
Answer
Answer
Answer
LLM Answer
Sentiment Analysis
FPB, FISAQA
Finred
Relation Extraction
Headline Classiﬁcation
News Headline
FOMC Classiﬁcation
FOMC
FPB, FISAQA
Sentiment Analysis
Relation Extraction
Finred
News Headline
Headline Classiﬁcation
FOMC Classiﬁcation
FOMC
LLM
LLM
LLM
LLM
Base
Merged LLM
a) b)
c)
Fig. 1. The three approaches used in this work a) single task fine-tuning, b)Multi-task fine-tuning c)Merging with vanilla models
3 EXPERIMENT SETUP
In this section, we provide a detailed overview of the experimental setup used for both in-context learning (ICL) and
fine-tuning experiments. This setup includes the selection of models, the configuration of training parameters, and the
choice of datasets, all carefully designed to assess the effectiveness of various approaches in adapting large language
models to domain-specific financial tasks. By standardizing these conditions, we aim to ensure a fair comparison
between different techniques, ultimately highlighting the strengths and limitations of each method in enhancing model
performance across specialized financial text classification tasks.
3.1 Models
We conduct ICL and fine-tuning experiments using various open-source small models to examine the effects of different
model sizes and pre-training datasets. All models employed in this study utilize a decoder-only transformer architecture.
We selected three open-source models because they are among the most powerful small-size open-source models
available. We fine-tune both the instruct and base models for the Llama3 and Mistral models, and only the instruct model
for the Phi3 model since the base model was not available. It should be noted that ICL experiments were exclusively
conducted on the instruct models.


[Page 7]
A Comparative Analysis of Instruction Fine-Tuning LLMs for Financial Text Classification ,
(1) Llama3-8B[17]: This latest version from the Llama family is pre-trained on 15 trillion tokens. Compared to its
predecessor (e.g. Llama-2), it features a larger tokenizer and a higher-quality training dataset obtained through an
enhanced data-filtering pipeline. The instruction-fine-tuned variant of this model has undergone a combination
of supervised fine-tuning (SFT), rejection sampling, proximal policy optimization (PPO), and direct preference
optimization (DPO).
(2) Mistral-7B[22]: The smallest model in the Mistral family, this 7-billion parameter model is fine-tuned to achieve
performance surpassing that of all other models of similar size on the MT-Bench benchmark.
(3) Phi-3-mini-Instruct[1]: This model, with 3.8 billion parameters, is pre-trained on 3.3 trillion tokens. We utilized
the instruction-fine-tuned version, which incorporates post-training processes like supervised fine-tuning and
direct preference optimization to enhance instruction-following capabilities.
3.2 Tasks and Datasets
We conduct ICL and fine-tuning experiments on four financial text classification tasks: sentiment analysis, relation
extraction, news headline classification, and hawkish-dovish classification 1. Details of the dataset are provided in Table
1, and splitting methods and statistics are presented in Table 22 in appendix .1.
Sentiment Analysis is a critical tool in finance, used to predict market trends and investment behavior by analyzing
news and social media data [24, 32]. Timely extraction of sentiment from these sources is crucial for decision-making
by traders and investors. Following BloombergGPT’s method [50], we use two sentiment datasets, reserving 20% of the
labeled data for testing.
(1) Financial PhraseBank [30]: Financial PhraseBank [30]: This dataset contains sentiment classifications (positive,
negative, neutral) derived from financial news, annotated by 5-8 individuals. We focus on the subset with at least
50% agreement among annotators.
(2) FiQA Sentiment Analysis [58]: This dataset comprises 961 samples, each annotated with one of three labels:
positive, neutral, or negative.
News Headlines Classification focuses on extracting actionable information from news beyond basic sentiment
analysis, which is valuable for investors, policymakers, and market practitioners. Utilizing the Headlines dataset [42]
with 11,412 annotated news headlines about "gold" from 2000 to 2019, we extract additional dimensions like price
movements. Specifically, we focus on a subset converting it into a three-class dataset identifying gold prices as Up,
Down, or Stable.
Hawkish-Dovish Classification involves categorizing Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) monetary policy
statements as either hawkish or dovish. This classification is significant due to its impact on financial market returns.
Conventional sentiment analysis models, which typically categorize text as positive or negative, struggle to capture
the nuanced policy stance in these texts accurately. As mentioned in the study, for example, a sentence containing the
word "increase" could be either dovish or hawkish depending on context, without necessarily conveying negativity. To
address this challenge, we utilized a dataset where FOMC statements were annotated as Hawkish, Dovish, or Neutral,
following the splitting method outlined in the original study [38].
Relation extraction plays a crucial role in financial text analysis by identifying relationships between entities,
which supports tasks like knowledge graph creation, question answering, and semantic search. FinRed dataset focuses
on this task and identifys relationships in financial news and earnings transcripts. We transform the dataset into a
1Some of these dataset were obtained from the HuggingFacehttps://huggingface.co/TheFinAI and https://huggingface.co/FinGPT


[Page 8]
, Fameti et al.
classification task that identifies the relationship between two entities in a sentence, categorizing 29 relation classes
such as "subsidiary" and "manufacturer". We reserve 20% of the data for testing purposes [40].
3.3 Unseen Tasks and Datasets
To assess the generalizability of our fine-tuned models, we evaluated their performance on three unseen tasks. Details
of the dataset are provided in Table 1, and in Table 22 in appendix .1
Argument Unit Classification goes beyond sentiment analysis by exploring the detailed elements of market
dynamics and financial events. It entails identifying and categorizing specific units or segments of arguments within
earnings conference call data. This classification is fundamental for a detailed breakdown of financial narratives,
facilitating better comprehension and analysis. We used FinArg AUC dataset to classify sentences as either claims or
premises, facilitating a more nuanced analysis of financial narratives [44].
Causal Classification identifies implicit causal relationships within financial documents. Using the SC dataset,
sentences from financial news and Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) filings were classified as either causal or
noise, highlighting the underlying causes that influence market trends [31].
Deal Completeness Classification focuses on determining the status of mergers and acquisitions (M&A) events,
distinguishing between completed deals and ongoing rumors. The dataset includes news articles and tweets related to
M&A events, with each instance describing a potential deal between an acquirer and a target company, including IPO
rumors. Each instance is categorized as either complete (successful deal) or rumor (no deal materialized). This task
is crucial due to the impact of M&A deal rumors on the share price volatility of target firms, influencing cumulative
abnormal returns [57].
3.4 Methodology
In this section, we outline the methodologies employed in our study, beginning with a brief introduction to the setup
of instruction tuning for both base and instruct models. Finally, we describe the merging framework that combines
task-specific and base models to enhance generalizability.
3.4.1 Instruction Dataset for Instruct Models . We adopt the methodology outlined in [ 47] to create detailed
instructions that aid the model in understanding various tasks. Each task instance in our instruction dataset is structured
with three main components: task instruction, input text, and output.
The task instruction provides a guide for the task to be performed based on the input text, along with the expected
labels for each task. A comprehensive list of task instructions for each task is provided in Table 25 in Appendix .1. We
then create each sample from the original dataset by combining the instruction, input, and output in a specific format.
For the Instruct models, we generate a prompt for each model by including the special tokens specified in Table 23 in
Appendix .1. For test datasets, we enclose the instructions and input within the corresponding special tokens for each
model, while using label delimiters like "label:" as suggested in [26].
3.4.2 Instruction Dataset for Base Models . Following the approach of [45], we designed an instruction scheme
to aid the model in understanding the task. As detailed in Table 24 in Appendix .1, the instruction scheme includes a


[Page 9]
A Comparative Analysis of Instruction Fine-Tuning LLMs for Financial Text Classification ,
generic instruction, an instruction field to guide task completion, and task-specific instructions as shown in Table 25 in
Appendix .1. The scheme also features an input field and a response field that the LLMs are required to complete.
3.4.3 Instruction Fine-tuning. We conducted instruction fine-tuning on all three models using HuggingFace Trans-
formers with 2 epochs and the Adam-w torch fused optimizer. The batch size was set to 2, with an initial learning rate
of 2e-4 and warm-up steps comprising 3% of all training steps. The maximum length of input texts was 1024 for the
Phi-3 model and 2048 for the Mistral-7B and Llama3-8B models. All models were fine-tuned on 8 A100 40GB GPUs.
To optimize the fine-tuning process and reduce the computational cost, we employed techniques such as Low-Rank
Adaptation (LoRA) with a rank set to 32 and Lora alpha set to 46, alongside quantization [18]. LoRA enables fine-tuning
the low-rank decomposed factors of the original weight matrices rather than the full matrices, significantly reducing
trainable parameters. This approach allows training on less powerful hardware and shortens the total training time [25].
We experimented with two fine-tuning settings:
(1) Single-Task Fine-Tuning: Each model underwent separate fine-tuning on the dataset specific to each task,
as depicted in Figure 1a, utilizing the specified training settings. These fine-tuned models are subsequently
employed in the next section (Model Merging) to enhance the generalizability of the models on the unseen tasks.
(2) Multi-Task Fine-Tuning: Each base and instruct model underwent fine-tuning using a combination of instruc-
tion datasets, covering all tasks, as depicted in Figure 1b. The total dataset consists of 13,194 training examples,
as outlined in Table 22 in Appendix .1.
3.4.4 Model Merging . Further fine-tuning of pre-trained models can lead to catastrophic forgetting, degrading
general capabilities and reducing performance across tasks [63, 65]. To mitigate this, leveraging existing pre-trained
checkpoints is crucial. Model merging, combining parameters from multiple models trained on specific tasks into a
unified model, has become essential. This strategy supports multi-task and continual learning, reducing catastrophic
forgetting without retraining costs [15, 55].
Our study utilized MergeKit, a library for model merging, employing Task Arithmetic [20]. This technique involves
arithmetic on task vectors, representing differences between fine-tuned models and a common base model. Task
Arithmetic enhances generalizability and performance across diverse tasks, effectively mitigating catastrophic forgetting
[15]. We utilize single-task fine-tuned models on LlaMA3-8B and Mistral-7B models, as described in the previous section,
and merge them with the vanilla instruct models for the corresponding models (LlaMA3-8B and Mistral-7B) with equal
25% weight for each of the models 2, as shown in Figure 1c.
3.4.5 Baseline Models. We compare the fine-tuned and merged models against three baseline vanilla instruct models
and three specialized financial models:
(1) FinMA-7B [54]: A 7B parameter model instruction-fine-tuned for financial tasks, including multiple NLP and
forecasting tasks.
(2) AdaptLLM-7B [6]: A model continued pre-trained and fine-tuned on financial news.
(3) GPT-4 3: A robust model from OpenAI.
In the next section, we will review the results of our experiments in detail, focusing on the comparative performance
of the models under different settings, including zero-shot, few-shot, and multi-task fine-tuning scenarios. We will also
2we were unable to perform model merging for the Phi-3-Instruct model because the Language Model head was updated during fine-tuning and did not
match the vanilla model.
3We used the GPT-4 model from checkpoint preview of gpt-4-1106-preview and following website https://platform.openai.com/docs/models


[Page 10]
, Fameti et al.
analyze how these models handle unseen tasks and assess the impact of model merging techniques on improving their
generalization capabilities. Our analysis will highlight key trends, identify strengths and weaknesses of each approach,
and offer insights into the effectiveness of fine-tuning strategies for enhancing performance on domain-specific financial
tasks.
Model # example FPB FiQA-SA Headline-Dir FOMC
Acc F1 Acc F1 F1 F1
Llama3-8B
One-shot 75.5 75.1 72.5 74.8 89.1 52.8
Five-shot 72.7 73.4 73.3 74.4 88.7 53.2
ten-shot 68.9 70.5 66.1 74.7 88.1 53.6
Mistral-7B
One-shot 74.8 72.7 48.4 57.3 86.5 59.6
Five-shot 74.9 71.4 47.9 54.1 85.6 54.1
ten-shot 68.5 69.9 37.1 53.4 84.5 49.9
Phi-3-mini
One-shot 58.8 58.6 60.4 59.5 88.6 52.9
Five-shot 49.8 47.7 53.6 47. 87.3 46.1
ten-shot 26.5 51.2 51.3 49.5 81.1 39.3
Table 2. Few-shot experiment results on the FBP, FiQA-SA, Headline-Dir, and FOMC datasets using the Llama3-8B, Mistral-7B,
and Phi-3-mini instruct models. Results for the FinRED dataset are excluded due to its large label space, which resulted in very low
performance (below 5%).
4 RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
In this section, we present a comprehensive analysis of the model performance across various experimental setups,
including zero-shot, few-shot, multi-task fine-tuning, and model merging techniques. We also provide a detailed error
analysis and summarize the key findings.
4.0.1 Evaluation Framework. Following standard practices, We evaluate the models using standard classification
metrics such as accuracy, and weighted F1 score to assess their performance on financial text classification tasks. The
tasks include sentiment analysis, relation extraction, news headline classification, and hawkish-dovish classification. All
results are compared against baseline models, including state-of-the-art models like GPT-4 and FinMA-7B, to provide a
benchmark for evaluating improvements. We also report and discuss the results of based-fine-tuned, instruct-fine-tuned,
and merged models compared to the baselines across four datasets.
4.1 Zero-Shot Performance Analysis
As shown in Figure 3 and Table 3, the zero-shot performance of the vanilla instruct models (Phi-3, Mistral, and Llama3)
was relatively strong on the Financial PhraseBank (FPB), FiQA Sentiment Analysis (FiQA-SA), and headline classification
datasets. The Llama3 and Phi-3 models demonstrated notable accuracy in these tasks, while the Mistral model performed
below 50% on datasets that included tweets, likely due to its pre-training corpus lacking similar data.
However, all models struggled on the FOMC and FinRed datasets, showing suboptimal results. The FOMC dataset’s
complex monetary policy texts and the FinRed dataset’s extensive label set of 29 categories posed significant challenges,
even for the larger Llama3 model. This performance issue likely stems from the long-tail distributions and the intricate


[Page 11]
A Comparative Analysis of Instruction Fine-Tuning LLMs for Financial Text Classification ,
Fig. 2. Few-shot experiment results (Accuracy) on the FBP, FiQA-SA, Headline-Dir, and FOMC datasets using the Llama3-8B, Mistral-
7B, and Phi-3-mini instruct models. Results for the FinRED dataset are excluded due to its large label space, which resulted in a low
performance (below 5%).
nature of relation extraction tasks that are not well-represented in the models’ instruction-tuned training. These findings
align with prior observations that such datasets require specialized fine-tuning for optimal performance [47, 48].
On both the FOMC and FinRed datasets, all models exhibited subpar performance. We attribute the poor performance
on the FOMC dataset, which contains monetary policy texts, to the texts being more long-tailed compared to other


[Page 12]
, Fameti et al.
Fig. 3. Performance comparison of vanilla models (zero-shot instruct models), multi-task fine-tuned instruct models, multi-task
fine-tuned base models, and GPT-4 models on five financial classification datasets for Llama3-8B and Mistral-7B models. F1 score is
reported.
Fig. 4. Performance comparison of vanilla models (zero-shot instruct models), multi-task fine-tuned instruct models, and GPT-4
models on five financial classification datasets for Phi-3 model. F1 score is reported.
datasets in the pre-training phase, thereby making the downstream task more challenging. This observation aligns with
findings from [48]. The FinRed dataset, characterized by its large label space (29 labels) and intricate relation extraction
tasks, presented substantial challenges. These difficulties likely stem from these tasks not being adequately covered in
the instruction-tuned training, which is consistent with the findings of [47].
Notably, even the Llama3 model, despite its superior architecture and high-quality training data, performed below
10% on this dataset. This might be due to its strict adherence to instruction-tuned behavior, focusing solely on generating
labels without the added contextual explanations that other models like Mistral-7B and Phi-3 provided alongside the
labels, possibly due to their Chain-of-Thought (CoT) post-training.


[Page 13]
A Comparative Analysis of Instruction Fine-Tuning LLMs for Financial Text Classification ,
Experiment Model FPB FiQA-SA Headline-Dir FinRED FOMC FinArg M&A SC
Acc F1 Acc F1 F1 F1 F1 F1 F1 F1
Baseline Models
BloombergGPT - 51.2 - 75.2 - - - - - -
AdaptLLM-7B - 62.5 - 72.1 - - - - - -
FinMA-7B 86.0 86.1 78.3 79.2 - - 49.0 27.5 45.3 -
GPT-4 80.4 80.6 71.9 75.7 83.4 31.2 65.8 - - -
Vanilla Models
Llama3-8B 77.5 76.7 71.1 72.9 72.3 6.5 47.4 50.2 85.9 66.7
Mistral-7B 73.4 69.8 45.9 54.8 77.6 20.5 38.6 42.2 83.6 68.8
Phi-3-mini 72.8 72.9 72.7 74.8 87.1 24.8 48.5 54.1 80.1 66.5
MT-Base-FT Llama3-8B 79.1 79.4 87.2 85.3 95.3 69.1 68.7 23.4 72.5 52.6
Mistral-7B 86.8 86.6 85.5 85.1 95.5 76.4 67.1 13.4 70.9 31.8
MT-Instruct-FT
Llama3-8B 86.2 86.3 86.4 86.6 95.9 73.4 68.4 31.1 72.9 39.2
Mistral-7B 86.3 86.2 85.1 83.9 95.2 69.4 70.2 35.1 76.1 57.6
Phi-3-mini 84.7 84.1 79.5 81.5 95.6 67.2 66.5 53.5 77.7 64.9
Merged Models Llama3-8B 80.6 80.7 75.3 78.3 93.2 44.6 60.9 54.6 74.3 65.5
Mistral-7B 80.4 80.3 65.1 72.1 91.6 41.2 38.9 50.4 83.5 59.6
Table 3. Main experimental results for four financial classification tasks and three unseen financial classification tasks (FinArg, M&A,
Casual-SC). Vanilla models indicate the zero-shot performance of instruct models. MT-Base-FT refers to multi-task fine-tuned base
models, and MT-Instruct-FT refers to multi-task fine-tuned instruct models. Baseline models’ results: BloombergGPT results are
taken from [50], AdaptLLM-7B results are obtained from [6], and FinMA-7B results are taken from [54]. The best results are in bold.
4.2 Few-Shot Results
To explore the impact of few-shot learning, we conducted experiments using 1-shot, 5-shot, and 10-shot setups, em-
ploying three different random seeds for sampling demonstration examples, following the methodology in [48] and
reported the average performance. The few-shot results, compared against zero-shot results, are summarized in Figure
?? and Table 2.
We observed that 1-shot prompting generally improved model performance across most datasets, except for the Phi-
3-mini model, where performance slightly decreased on sentiment analysis tasks due to the adverse effects of unrelated
examples on smaller language models. Increasing the number of shots to 5 and 10 produced mixed results: while some
models like Llama3-8B and Mistral-7B showed only slight declines, others, particularly Phi-3-mini, experienced high
variability in performance, indicating its sensitivity to the number of examples used.
Notably, all models demonstrated a significant drop in performance on the headline classification dataset when
the number of demonstrations increased, even falling below the performance in the zeros-shot setting. This decline
suggests that few-shot settings can sometimes introduce noise, leading to a decrease in model accuracy, particularly for
smaller models [64].
However, models like Llama3-8B and Mistral-7B displayed only slight decreases on other datasets. Among all models,
Phi-3-mini showed the highest performance variability when the number of demonstrations increased, underscoring the
sensitivity of smaller models to few-shot settings, as previously highlighted in the literature [64]. Due to consistently


[Page 14]
, Fameti et al.
low performance on the FinRed dataset, which did not exceed 10%, we excluded these results from our analysis, aligning
with findings that suggest an increase in input complexity can adversely affect model accuracy on tasks with large label
sets[64].
4.3 Multi-Task Fine-Tuning
Our multi-task fine-tuning experiments demonstrated more stable behavior across models, as illustrated in Table 3
and Figures 3 and 4. Fine-tuning led to a substantial increase in model performance compared to zero-shot settings
in both base and instruct models. Notably, the instruct fine-tuned Llama3-8B model showed a dramatic improvement
from 6.5% to 73.4% on the relation extraction task (FinRED dataset), with similar gains observed in the Hawkish-Dovish
classification tasks (FOMC dataset). Mistral-7B and Phi-3 models showed an average 40% performance improvement
after fine-tuning on both base and instruct models.
Additionally, all models outperformed GPT-4 on these finance-related tasks, highlighting the limitations of GPT-4 in
specialized domains such as finance and the necessity for task-specific fine-tuning. In sentiment analysis tasks (FPB
and FiQA-SA datasets), our models performed comparably to the state-of-the-art FinMA-7B model, surpassing other
models like AdalpLLM-7B and BloombergGPT.
The results indicated that multi-task fine-tuned instruct models outperformed their base counterparts across all
datasets, except the Mistral-7B base model, which slightly outperformed the instruct variant on most tasks. This variance
could be attributed to differences in the quality of supervised fine-tuning prompts, suggesting that starting with a
robust instruction-tuned checkpoint may offer advantages for domain-specific fine-tuning.
The results of the multi-task fine-tuned Phi-3 models also demonstrate performance on par with the other two
models, despite having only 3.8 billion parameters. This highlights the potential of the Phi-3 model for fine-tuning
downstream financial tasks.
4.4 Generalization Multi-Task Fine-Tuned model to Unseen Tasks
The almost similar behavior observed in the multi-task fine-tuning of base and instruct models (using the same amount
of data without incorporating generic instruction data) on seen tasks indicates that both models benefit nearly equally
from fine-tuning on tasks present in the training corpus. However, our results on three unseen financial tasks, as shown
in Table 3 and Figures 5 and 6, indicate that multi-task fine-tuned base models exhibit significantly greater performance
declines compared to their instruct-tuned counterparts when generic instruction data is absent during fine-tuning. This
highlights the risk of performance degradation for base models on tasks they haven’t encountered, a trend consistent
with prior research on catastrophic forgetting [46, 65]. In contrast, instruct-tuned models retain stronger generalization
capabilities, making them more robust in handling unseen tasks.
For example, on the Argument Unit Classification task, the Llama3-8B model’s performance drops to 13.4%, while
on the Causal Classification task, the Mistral-7B model experiences a decline to 31.8%. Notably, the Phi-3-mini model,
despite its smaller size of 3.8 billion parameters, shows only a 2% performance drop, suggesting that it retains its general
capabilities better than larger models after fine-tuning. These findings emphasize the effectiveness of instruct-tuned


[Page 15]
A Comparative Analysis of Instruction Fine-Tuning LLMs for Financial Text Classification ,
models in maintaining performance across unfamiliar tasks.
Overall, while multi-task fine-tuning significantly improves performance on tasks within the training data, it can also
increase the risk of overfitting and catastrophic forgetting, particularly when generic instruction data is not included in
the training process. These results underscore the importance of diverse instruction data in enhancing a model’s ability
to generalize effectively across unseen tasks.
Fig. 5. Performance comparison of vanilla models (zero-shot instruct models), multi-task fine-tuned instruct models, multi-task
fine-tuned base models, and merged models on three unseen datasets for Llama3-8B and Mistral-7B models. F1 score is reported.
Fig. 6. Performance comparison of vanilla models (zero-shot instruct models) and multi-task fine-tuned instruct models on three
unseen datasets for the Phi-3 model. F1 score is reported.


[Page 16]
, Fameti et al.
4.5 Merged Models
To mitigate the degradation of zero-shot performance on unseen tasks, we utilized the MergeKit framework (arithmetic
method), which combines single-task fine-tuned models with the vanilla instruct model. The merging approach
significantly enhances performance on unseen tasks, with results often surpassing the original zero-shot performance,
significant for the FinArg dataset.
The results for the Llama3-8B and Mistral-7B models are shown in Figure 5. For example, the merged models outper-
formed both the fine-tuned, base models and zero-shot in handling complex tasks, suggesting that the integration of
diverse task knowledge leads to a more generalized and robust performance. The performance of single-task fine-tuning
on both base and instruct models is presented in Appendix .2.
The merging strategy helps to preserve the benefits of fine-tuning while reducing the risk of catastrophic forgetting
on unseen datasets without incorporating a generic instruction dataset, which increases computational cost and time.
While fine-tuning improves performance over base models, merging fine-tuned models further enhances their
ability to handle unseen tasks by a) Combining diverse knowledge sources, b) Reducing overfitting, and c) Leveraging
complementary strengths of different models. The regularization effect from merging also helps to produce a more
generalized and robust model performance across diverse tasks.
We can also observe that the performance drop of the Phi3 base model compared to its fine-tuned counterpart is not
much compared to the other two models (Llama3 and Mistral), as indicated in 6. This could be due to the following
reasons.
• Model Architecture: Phi3 may have an architecture that is more resistant to overfitting during fine-tuning. It’s
possible that Phi3 has better built-in regularization mechanisms or a structure that promotes better generalization.
• Pre-training Approach: The pre-training approach used for Phi3 might result in more robust general knowledge
that is less easily overwritten during fine-tuning. This could lead to better retention of broad capabilities even
after task-specific training.
• Model Size: If Phi3 is a smaller model compared to Mistral and Llama3, it might have less capacity to overfit to
the fine-tuning data, paradoxically leading to better generalization on unseen tasks.
The significant performance drops in Mistral and Llama3 suggest that these models might be more susceptible to
overfitting during fine-tuning, possibly due to larger model sizes, different architectures, or fine-tuning approaches
that allow for more dramatic changes to the model’s parameters. This difference highlights the importance of careful
fine-tuning practices and the need to consider the trade-offs between task-specific performance and general capabilities
when adapting large language models to specific tasks. It also demonstrates why techniques like model merging can be
valuable in recovering and combining the strengths of different model versions.
4.6 Error Analysis and Model Insights
Our error analysis reveals significant improvements in fine-tuned models across various tasks, particularly in financial
sentiment detection, relation extraction, news headline classification, and hawkish-dovish classification. These enhance-
ments stem from the models’ increased ability to capture domain-specific nuances, understand hierarchical corporate
structures, and interpret economic indicators. In financial sentiment detection, fine-tuned models excel at identifying
subtle cues and handling mixed sentiments more effectively. For relation extraction and news headline classification,
fine-tuning leads to a better interpretation of corporate ties and financial movements. Similarly, in the hawkish-dovish


[Page 17]
A Comparative Analysis of Instruction Fine-Tuning LLMs for Financial Text Classification ,
classification, the models display a stronger grasp of monetary policies and their economic implications. Below, we
provide detailed case studies involving Phi-3, Mistral, and Llama3 models, highlighting performance improvements
across these key areas.
4.6.1 Financial Sentiment Classification Result Analysis. Fine-tuning yielded significant performance gains in financial
sentiment classification, particularly in the following areas:
1. Domain-Specific Knowledge. Fine-tuned models demonstrated improved comprehension of financial language and
context. For example, in Table 4, fined-tuned models correctly interpreted growth statements in a financial context,
where the base models failed to capture the nuance.
Sentence: "Finnish Bore that is owned by the Rettig family has grown recently
through the acquisition of smaller shipping companies."
Ground Truth Label: Positive
Model Predictions:
Phi-3 Base: Neutral, Phi-3 Fine-tuned: Positive
Mistral Base: Neutral, Mistral Fine-tuned: Positive
Llama3 Base: Neutral, Llama3 Fine-tuned: Positive
Table 4. Domain-Specific Knowledge Example - FPB dataset
2. Improved Sentiment Detection. Fine-tuned models showed enhanced capability in detecting subtle sentiment cues
within financial statements, such as recognizing negative sentiment related to financial losses, as illustrated in Table 5.
Sentence: "Finnair said that the cancellation of flights would cause daily
losses of =C2.5 million US$3 million."
Ground Truth Label: Negative
Model Predictions:
Mistral Base: Neutral, Mistral Fine-tuned: Negative
Llama3 Base: Neutral, Llama3 Fine-tuned: Negative
Phi-3 Base: Neutral, Phi-3 Fine-tuned: Negative
Table 5. Improved Sentiment Detection Example - FPB dataset
3. Better Handling of Mixed Sentiment. When encountering statements containing positive and negative elements,
fine-tuned models, particularly Mistral, identify the prevailing sentiment better, as shown in Table 6.
Sentence: "Kalnapilio-Tauro Grupe, which is owned by Denmark’s Royal Unibrew,
raised its market share... by 14.5 percent to 40.5 million liters."
Ground Truth Label: Positive
Model Predictions:
Phi-3 Base: Positive, Phi-3 Fine-tuned: Positive
Mistral Base: Neutral, Mistral Fine-tuned: Positive
Llama3 Base: Positive, Llama3 Fine-tuned: Positive
Table 6. Better Handling of Mixed Sentiment Example - FPB dataset


[Page 18]
, Fameti et al.
4. Reduced Tendency to Default to Neutral. Fine-tuned models show greater confidence in assigning sentiment to
complex statements, often correctly identifying positive or negative impacts in financial contexts where base models
defaulted to neutral, as demonstrated in Table 7.
Sentence: "The transaction will have a positive impact of around EUR2m on
earnings, which Ruukki will recognize during the fourth quarter."
Ground Truth Label: Positive
Model Predictions:
Phi-3 Base: Neutral, Phi-3 Fine-tuned: Positive
Mistral Base: Neutral, Mistral Fine-tuned: Positive
Llama3 Base: Neutral, Llama3 Fine-tuned: Positive
Table 7. Reduced Tendency to Default to Neutral Example - FPB dataset
5. Understanding of Financial Metrics. Fine-tuned models exhibited an enhanced ability to interpret financial metrics
and their implications, as evidenced in Table 8, where models accurately assessed financial performance indicators.
Sentence: "Cash flow from operations rose to EUR 52.7 mn from EUR 15.6 mn in
2007."
Ground Truth Label: Positive
Model Predictions:
Phi-3 Base: Positive, Phi-3 Fine-tuned: Positive
Mistral Base: Neutral, Mistral Fine-tuned: Positive
Llama3 Base: Positive, Llama3 Fine-tuned: Positive
Table 8. Understanding of Financial Metrics Example - FPB dataset
4.6.2 FOMC Classification Result Analysis. Fine-tuned models also showed marked improvements in interpreting
monetary policy statements from the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). This was particularly evident in their
ability to interpret economic indicators and broader economic contexts.
1. Understanding Economic Indicators. Fine-tuned models better interpret the impact of economic indicators and the
relationship between them like unemployment rates.
For example, as illustrated in Table 9, the base models did not interpret the economic indicators correctly and
classified this example as neutral. In contrast, fine-tuned models correctly identify it as Hawkish, recognizing that low
unemployment and robust job gains typically lead to tighter monetary policy to prevent overheating.
2. Improved Contextual Interpretation. Fine-tuned models show marked improvement in interpreting broader economic
contexts.
The example of table 10, indicates the base models often interpret the examples incorporating economic contexts
as neutral, while fine-tuned models correctly identify it as Dovish, recognizing that “sustained expansion” typically
implies a continuation of accommodative policy.


[Page 19]
A Comparative Analysis of Instruction Fine-Tuning LLMs for Financial Text Classification ,
Sentence: "The unemployment rate edged down to 3.5 percent, and job gains
have been robust in recent months."
Ground Truth Label: Hawkish
Model Predictions:
Phi-3 Base: Neutral, Phi-3 Fine-tuned: Hawkish
Mistral Base: Neutral, Mistral Fine-tuned: Hawkish
Llama3 Base: Neutral, Llama3 Fine-tuned: Hawkish
Table 9. Understanding Economic Indicators Example - FOMC dataset
Sentence: "Inflation has been running persistently below the Committee’s
longer-run goal of 2 percent."
Ground Truth Label: Dovish
Model Predictions:
Phi-3 Base: Neutral, Phi-3 Fine-tuned: Dovish
Mistral Base: Neutral, Mistral Fine-tuned: Dovish
Llama3 Base: Neutral, Llama3 Fine-tuned: Dovish
Table 10. Improved Contextual Interpretation Example - FOMC dataset
Sentence: "Although household spending has been rising at a strong pace,
business fixed investment and exports remain weak."
Ground Truth Label: Dovish
Model Predictions:
Phi-3 Base: Neutral, Phi-3 Fine-tuned: Dovish
Mistral Base: Neutral, Mistral Fine-tuned: Dovish
Llama3 Base: Hawkish, Llama3 Fine-tuned: Dovish
Table 11. Reduced Misclassification of Complex Statements Example - FOMC example
3. Reduced Misclassification of Complex Statements. Fine-tuned models display improvement in handling statements
with mixed signals.
Table 11 illustrates that base models often struggle with such mixed signals in complex statements, frequently
defaulting to Neutral. Fine-tuned models are better at weighing these factors, often correctly identifying this as a Dovish
statement due to the emphasis on weak areas of the economy.
4. Handling of Edge Cases. Fine-tuned models show improved performance on edge cases or unusual phrasings that
might confuse base models.
Sentence: "The Committee will be patient as it determines what future
adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate may be appropriate."
Ground Truth Label: Dovish
Model Predictions:
Phi-3 Base: Neutral, Phi-3 Fine-tuned: Dovish
Mistral Base: Neutral, Mistral Fine-tuned: Dovish
Llama3 Base: Neutral, Llama3 Fine-tuned: Dovish
Table 12. Handling of Edge Cases Example - FOMC dataset


[Page 20]
, Fameti et al.
Example of table 12 shows base models often interpret sentences with unusual phrases as Neutral, while fine-tuned
models correctly identify it as Dovish, recognizing that “patience” in this context often implies a willingness to maintain
accommodative policy.
4.6.3 FinRED Dataset Error and Improvement Analysis. In the domain of relation extraction from financial texts,
fine-tuned models displayed significant improvements across several dimensions:
1. Domain-Specific Knowledge Acquisition. Fine-tuned models have been exposed to a large volume of financial and
corporate relationship data, allowing them to learn domain-specific nuances that base models may not have encountered.
Sentence: "For more than 25 years, Stratasys Ltd. ( SSYS ) has been a defining
force and dominant player in 3D printing and additive manufacturing – shaping
the way things are made."
Ground Truth Label: Product/material produced
Model Predictions:
Phi-3 Base: Developer, Phi-3 Fine-tuned: Product/material produced
Mistral Base: Manufacturer, Mistral Fine-tuned: Product/material produced
Llama3 Base: Manufacturer, Llama3 Fine-tuned: Product/material produced
Table 13. Domain-Specific Knowledge Acquisition Example - FinRED dataset
In the example of table 13, in the Stratasys-3D printing relationship, the fine-tuned models correctly identify
the "product/material produced" relationship, understanding that Stratasys is a company that produces 3D printing
technologies. The base models, lacking this specific industry knowledge, misclassify the relationship as "developer" or
"manufacturer", which are less precise in describing the company’s role in the 3D printing industry. This demonstrates
how fine-tuned models have acquired domain-specific knowledge about the 3D printing industry and the relationships
between companies and their core technologies.
2. Contextual Interpretation. Fine-tuned models develop an enhanced ability to interpret contextual cues within
sentences, leading to more accurate relationship classification.
Sentence: "Miner Glencore surged 9 percent, having dropped 30 percent in the
previous session to an all-time low."
Ground Truth Label: Industry
Model Predictions:
Phi-3 Base: None, Phi-3 Fine-tuned: Industry
Mistral Base: Industry, Mistral Fine-tuned: Industry
Llama3 Base: Owned by, Llama3 Fine-tuned: Industry
Table 14. Contextual Interpretation Example - FinRED dataset
The example of table 14, in the Glencore-mining case, the fine-tuned model correctly interprets "mining and trading
company" to classify Glencore’s relationship to mining as "industry". The base model, possibly confused by the complex
sentence structure, and misclassified this as a corporate structure relationship ("parent organization" or "subsidiary").


[Page 21]
A Comparative Analysis of Instruction Fine-Tuning LLMs for Financial Text Classification ,
Sentence: "Gucci owner Kering (Swiss: KER.SW - news) published its financial
report for the quarter."
Ground Truth Label: parent organization
Model Predictions:
Phi-3 Base: owner of, Phi-3 Fine-tuned: parent organization
Mistral Base: owner of, Mistral Fine-tuned: parent organization
Llama3 Base: owned by, Llama3 Fine-tuned: owned by
Table 15. Hierarchical Relationship Understanding Example - FinRED dataset
3. Hierarchical Relationship Understanding. Through exposure to various corporate structures, fine-tuned models
better understand the nuances of organizational hierarchies and roles.
In the case presented in table 15, the fine-tuned models identified the nuanced hierarchical relationship ("parent
organization") between Kering and Gucci, while the base models defaulted to "owner, " failing to capture the specific
corporate structure. This shows the improved ability of fine-tuned models to comprehend the complexities of orga-
nizational hierarchies. This examples shows how fine-tuned models develop a deeper understanding of hierarchical
relationships, particularly in corporate structures, where roles and organizational layers are not always straightforward.
4. Entity-Relationship Mapping. Fine-tuned models develop a more sophisticated understanding of how different
entities (companies, products, people) typically relate to each other in the corporate world.
Sentence: "First Eagle is currently owned by members of the founding families."
Ground Truth Label: Industry
Model Predictions:
Phi-3 Base: Owner of, Phi-3 Fine-tuned: Industry
Llama3 Base: Owner of, Llama3 Fine-tuned: Industry
Mistral Base: Owner of, Mistral Fine-tuned: Industry
Table 16. Entity-Relationship Mapping Example - FinRED dataset
The example of table 16 shows that the fine-tuned models correctly understood the ownership structure of First
Eagle, while the base models confused the relationship and wrongly focused on ownership, highlighting the fine-tuned
models’ better grasp of corporate entity-relationship mapping.
5. Reduction of Overgeneralization. Fine-tuned models learn to avoid defaulting to common but incorrect relationships
when faced with ambiguity, a problem often seen in base models.
Sentence: "Saudi Arabian budget carrier flynas, which made a name for itself
as a low-cost airline."
Ground Truth Label: Product/material produced
Model Predictions:
Phi-3 Base: Manufacturer, Phi-3 Fine-tuned: Product/material produced
Mistral Base: Manufacturer, Mistral Fine-tuned: Product/material produced
Llama3 Base: Manufacturer, Llama3 Fine-tuned: Product/material produced
Table 17. Reduction of Overgeneralization Example - FinRED dataset


[Page 22]
, Fameti et al.
In this case showen in table 17, the relationship between flynas and the products or services it provides, with
the ground truth label being "product/material produced. " Here, the base models overgeneralized the relationship by
assuming that flynas was a "manufacturer, " which is a common but incorrect assumption, while the fine-tuned models
correctly captured the nuanced relationship of flynas producing a service (low-cost flights).
6. Handling of Complex Sentences. Financial texts often contain complex, information-dense sentences. Fine-tuned
models learn to parse these more effectively.
Sentence: "Excluding $4.4 million of costs associated with the strategic
restructuring initiative recorded in the six months ended June 30, 2019, our
selling, general and administrative expenses increased $6.4 million primarily
due to increased selling and marketing expenses in connection with the
commercial launch of ANJESO."
Ground Truth Label: Industry
Model Predictions:
Phi-3 Base: Product/material produced, Phi-3 Fine-tuned: Industry
Mistral Base: Marketing, Mistral Fine-tuned: Industry
Llama3 Base: None, Llama3 Fine-tuned: Industry
Table 18. Handling of Complex Sentences Example - FinRED dataset
In the example of table 18, despite the complexity of this financial statement, the fine-tuned models correctly identify
the relationship between the company and its industry. They focus on the relevant information about selling and
marketing expenses, inferring an industry relationship. The base models either misclassify or fail to identify any
relationship in this complex sentence.
Through these case studies, it’s evident that fine-tuning significantly improves model performance across various
financial and economic tasks. Fine-tuned models exhibit better sentiment detection, relationship extraction, and
contextual understanding, leading to more accurate predictions and analyses. However, fine-tuning LLM models can
lead to catastrophic forgetting and compromise the model performance on unseen tasks which can be improved by
using techniques such as merging models.
4.6.4 Merging Models for Improved Performance on unseen tasks-datasets. Merging models helps improve performance
on unseen tasks for several reasons.
1. Diverse knowledge integration. Merged models combine knowledge from multiple models trained on different tasks
or datasets, allowing them to leverage a broader range of information and patterns.
Sentence from M&A dataset: "Autodesk, a maker of design and architecture
software, has reached an agreement to acquire construction technology start-up
PlanGrid for USD 875.00 million net of cash."
Ground Truth Label: Rumor
Model Predictions:
Llama3 Base: Complete, Llamma3 Fine-tuned: Rumor
Mistral-Llama3 Merged: Complete
Table 19. Example of Merging Models to Handle Unseen Tasks from M&A dataset


[Page 23]
A Comparative Analysis of Instruction Fine-Tuning LLMs for Financial Text Classification ,
For the above entry, the Llama3 fine-tuned model incorrectly classified it as a rumor, while both the base and merged
models correctly identified it as complete. This suggests that the fine-tuned model might have overfit to certain patterns,
while the merged model was able to correct this error.
2. Reduced Overfitting and Regularization. Merging can act as a form of regularization, helping to average out
overspecialized patterns and less likely to overfit to specific patterns in the fine-tuning data. It promotes more general
features, making the models more robust on unseen tasks.
Sentence from FinArg dataset: "It’s a global number and we are very glad to
have the success of the FBA program."
Ground Truth Label: Claim
Model Predictions:
Llama3 Fine-tuned: Neutral, Llama3 Merged: Claim
Mistral Fine-tuned: Premise, Mistral Merged: Claim
Table 20. Reduced Overfitting and Regularization Example - FinArg dataset
As shown in table 20, the merged model avoids the overfitting and classify the sentence correctly as “claim”, where
the fine-tuned model misclassifies this example as a “premise”.
3. Complementary strengths. Different models may excel at different aspects of the task. Merging allows the combined
model to leverage the strengths of each constituent model as shown in table ??
Sentence from SC dataset: " Seth Golden, , Daily Articles, 0 The first trading
day post the Saudi Arabia oil field bombings and speculative production
slowdown pushed crude oil future (CLF) prices up roughly 15%, with equity
prices moving lower Monday."
Ground Truth Label: Causal
Model Predictions:
Llama3 Fine-tuned: Noise, Llama3 Merged: Causal
Mistral Fine-tuned: Noise, Mistral Merged: Causal
Table 21. Complementary strengths Example - SC dataset
5 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this study, we evaluated the in-context learning (ICL) capabilities of three small instruct models—Llama3-8B, Mistral-
7B, and Phi-3—across various financial classification tasks. The results highlighted variability in model performance with
increasing numbers of shots. Overall, ICL did not significantly enhance the models’ ability to learn downstream tasks
from examples, particularly for smaller models. Among the three, Llama3-8B exhibited marginally better performance,
though the gains were not substantial.
Beyond ICL, our primary focus was on the instruct fine-tuning of both the base and instruct versions of these models
for four key financial tasks: sentiment analysis, news headline classification, relation extraction, and hawkish-dovish
classification. The results demonstrate that multi-task fine-tuning of instruct models significantly improves task-specific
performance, particularly for complex tasks such as relation extraction and hawkish-dovish classification. These findings
underscore the potential of fine-tuning smaller LLMs for domain-specific tasks in finance.


[Page 24]
, Fameti et al.
Notably, the study also revealed that multi-task fine-tuned base models, such as Mistral-7B and Llama3-8B, exhibited
greater performance degradation on unseen tasks compared to their instruct-tuned counterparts. This suggests that
starting with instruct models, which have already been fine-tuned on a variety of tasks, provides a more robust
foundation for maintaining generalization capabilities. Notably, the Phi-3 model, despite its smaller size (3.8 billion
parameters), showed minimal performance decline on unseen tasks, indicating that it remains highly capable after
fine-tuning for specialized financial tasks.
Looking ahead, we plan to extend this work by exploring more complex financial tasks, such as question answering,
which involves retrieving numerical data from tables, and stock market prediction. These tasks will allow us to further
investigate instruct fine-tuning on both small base and instruct models. Additionally, as model merging is gaining
traction, we aim to experiment with advanced merging techniques like Dare and Tie to assess their effectiveness in
mitigating performance degradation on unseen tasks, potentially leading to more versatile and resilient models.
REFERENCES
[1] Marah Abdin, Sam Ade Jacobs, Ammar Ahmad Awan, Jyoti Aneja, Ahmed Awadallah, Hany Awadalla, Nguyen Bach, Amit Bahree, Arash Bakhtiari,
Harkirat Behl, et al. 2024. Phi-3 technical report: A highly capable language model locally on your phone. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.14219 (2024).
[2] Amanda Bertsch, Maor Ivgi, Uri Alon, Jonathan Berant, Matthew R Gormley, and Graham Neubig. 2024. In-Context Learning with Long-Context
Models: An In-Depth Exploration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.00200 (2024).
[3] TB Brown, B Mann, N Ryder, M Subbiah, JD Kaplan, P Dhariwal, A Neelakantan, P Shyam, G Sastry, A Askell, et al. 2020. Language Models are
Few-Shot Learners Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33. (2020).
[4] OpenAI ChatGPT. 2023. optimizing language models for dialogue. OpenAI. 2022.
[5] Qianglong Chen, Guohai Xu, Ming Yan, Ji Zhang, Fei Huang, Luo Si, and Yin Zhang. 2023. Distinguish before answer: Generating contrastive
explanation as knowledge for commonsense question answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.08135 (2023).
[6] Daixuan Cheng, Shaohan Huang, and Furu Wei. 2023. Adapting large language models via reading comprehension. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.09530
(2023).
[7] Wei-Lin Chiang, Zhuohan Li, Zi Lin, Ying Sheng, Zhanghao Wu, Hao Zhang, Lianmin Zheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Yonghao Zhuang, Joseph E Gonzalez,
et al. 2023. Vicuna: An open-source chatbot impressing gpt-4 with 90%* chatgpt quality. See https://vicuna. lmsys. org (accessed 14 April 2023) 2, 3
(2023), 6.
[8] Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles
Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, et al. 2023. Palm: Scaling language modeling with pathways. Journal of Machine Learning Research 24, 240 (2023),
1–113.
[9] Xiang Deng, Vasilisa Bashlovkina, Feng Han, Simon Baumgartner, and Michael Bendersky. 2023. What do llms know about financial markets? a
case study on reddit market sentiment analysis. In Companion Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2023 . 107–110.
[10] Kelvin Du, Frank Xing, and Erik Cambria. 2023. Incorporating multiple knowledge sources for targeted aspect-based financial sentiment analysis.
ACM Transactions on Management Information Systems 14, 3 (2023), 1–24.
[11] Alexander Dunn, John Dagdelen, Nicholas Walker, Sanghoon Lee, Andrew S Rosen, Gerbrand Ceder, Kristin Persson, and Anubhav Jain. 2022.
Structured information extraction from complex scientific text with fine-tuned large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.05238 (2022).
[12] Louis H Ederington and Jae Ha Lee. 1993. How markets process information: News releases and volatility. The Journal of Finance 48, 4 (1993),
1161–1191.
[13] Sorouralsadat Fatemi and Yuheng Hu. 2023. A Comparative Analysis of Fine-Tuned LLMs and Few-Shot Learning of LLMs for Financial Sentiment
Analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.08725 (2023).
[14] Georgios Fatouros, John Soldatos, Kalliopi Kouroumali, Georgios Makridis, and Dimosthenis Kyriazis. 2023. Transforming sentiment analysis in the
financial domain with ChatGPT. Machine Learning with Applications 14 (2023), 100508.
[15] Charles Goddard, Shamane Siriwardhana, Malikeh Ehghaghi, Luke Meyers, Vlad Karpukhin, Brian Benedict, Mark McQuade, and Jacob Solawetz.
2024. Arcee’s MergeKit: A Toolkit for Merging Large Language Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.13257 (2024).
[16] Axel Groß-Klußmann and Nikolaus Hautsch. 2011. When machines read the news: Using automated text analytics to quantify high frequency
news-implied market reactions. Journal of Empirical Finance 18, 2 (2011), 321–340.
[17] Meta Group. 2024. LLaMA3 Model. https://ai.meta.com/blog/meta-llama-3/. Accessed: 2024-04-18.
[18] Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, and Weizhu Chen. 2021. Lora: Low-rank adaptation
of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.09685 (2021).
[19] Quzhe Huang, Mingxu Tao, Chen Zhang, Zhenwei An, Cong Jiang, Zhibin Chen, Zirui Wu, and Yansong Feng. 2023. Lawyer llama technical report.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.15062 (2023).


[Page 25]
A Comparative Analysis of Instruction Fine-Tuning LLMs for Financial Text Classification ,
[20] Gabriel Ilharco, Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Mitchell Wortsman, Suchin Gururangan, Ludwig Schmidt, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and Ali Farhadi. 2022. Editing
models with task arithmetic. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.04089 (2022).
[21] Pranab Islam, Anand Kannappan, Douwe Kiela, Rebecca Qian, Nino Scherrer, and Bertie Vidgen. 2023. Financebench: A new benchmark for financial
question answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.11944 (2023).
[22] Albert Q Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Mensch, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Diego de las Casas, Florian Bressand, Gianna
Lengyel, Guillaume Lample, Lucile Saulnier, et al. 2023. Mistral 7B. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06825 (2023).
[23] Qiang Li, Xiaoyan Yang, Haowen Wang, Qin Wang, Lei Liu, Junjie Wang, Yang Zhang, Mingyuan Chu, Sen Hu, Yicheng Chen, et al. 2023. From
Beginner to Expert: Modeling Medical Knowledge into General LLMs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.01040 (2023).
[24] Xianzhi Li, Samuel Chan, Xiaodan Zhu, Yulong Pei, Zhiqiang Ma, Xiaomo Liu, and Sameena Shah. 2023. Are ChatGPT and GPT-4 General-Purpose
Solvers for Financial Text Analytics? A Study on Several Typical Tasks. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing: Industry Track . 408–422.
[25] Yinheng Li, Shaofei Wang, Han Ding, and Hang Chen. 2023. Large language models in finance: A survey. In Proceedings of the Fourth ACM
International Conference on AI in Finance . 374–382.
[26] Alisa Liu, Xiaochuang Han, Yizhong Wang, Yulia Tsvetkov, Yejin Choi, and Noah A Smith. 2024. Tuning language models by proxy. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2401.08565 (2024).
[27] Tiedong Liu and Bryan Kian Hsiang Low. 2023. Goat: Fine-tuned llama outperforms gpt-4 on arithmetic tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14201
(2023).
[28] Alejandro Lopez-Lira and Yuehua Tang. 2023. Can chatgpt forecast stock price movements? return predictability and large language models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2304.07619 (2023).
[29] Burton G Malkiel. 2011. The efficient-market hypothesis and the financial crisis. In Rethinking finance: perspectives on the crisis (Proceedings of a
conference). Russel Sage Foundation . Citeseer.
[30] Pekka Malo, Ankur Sinha, Pekka Korhonen, Jyrki Wallenius, and Pyry Takala. 2014. Good debt or bad debt: Detecting semantic orientations in
economic texts. Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology 65, 4 (2014), 782–796.
[31] Dominique Mariko, Hanna Abi Akl, Estelle Labidurie, Stephane Durfort, Hugues De Mazancourt, and Mahmoud El-Haj. 2020. Financial document
causality detection shared task (fincausal 2020). arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.02505 (2020).
[32] Kostadin Mishev, Ana Gjorgjevikj, Irena Vodenska, Lubomir T Chitkushev, and Dimitar Trajanov. 2020. Evaluation of sentiment analysis in finance:
from lexicons to transformers. IEEE access 8 (2020), 131662–131682.
[33] Maryam Mousavi, Hasan Davulcu, Mohsen Ahmadi, Robert Axelrod, Richard Davis, and Scott Atran. 2022. Effective messaging on social media:
What makes online content go viral?. In Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2022 . 2957–2966.
[34] Maryam Mousavi, Elena Steiner, Steven R. Corman, Scott Ruston, Dylan Weber, and Hasan Davulcu. 2021. Stif: Semi-supervised taxonomy induction
using term embeddings and clustering. In Proceedings of the 2021 5th International Conference on Natural Language Processing and Information
Retrieval. 115–123.
[35] Kostiantyn Omelianchuk, Andrii Liubonko, Oleksandr Skurzhanskyi, Artem Chernodub, Oleksandr Korniienko, and Igor Samokhin. 2024. Pillars of
Grammatical Error Correction: Comprehensive Inspection Of Contemporary Approaches In The Era of Large Language Models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2404.14914 (2024).
[36] R OpenAI. 2023. Gpt-4 technical report. arxiv 2303.08774. View in Article 2, 5 (2023).
[37] Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex
Ray, et al. 2022. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. Advances in neural information processing systems 35 (2022),
27730–27744.
[38] Agam Shah, Suvan Paturi, and Sudheer Chava. 2023. Trillion dollar words: A new financial dataset, task & market analysis. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.07972 (2023).
[39] Raj Sanjay Shah, Kunal Chawla, Dheeraj Eidnani, Agam Shah, Wendi Du, Sudheer Chava, Natraj Raman, Charese Smiley, Jiaao Chen, and Diyi Yang.
2022. When flue meets flang: Benchmarks and large pre-trained language model for financial domain. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.00083 (2022).
[40] Soumya Sharma, Tapas Nayak, Arusarka Bose, Ajay Kumar Meena, Koustuv Dasgupta, Niloy Ganguly, and Pawan Goyal. 2022. FinRED: A dataset
for relation extraction in financial domain. In Companion Proceedings of the Web Conference 2022 . 595–597.
[41] Karan Singhal, Tao Tu, Juraj Gottweis, Rory Sayres, Ellery Wulczyn, Le Hou, Kevin Clark, Stephen Pfohl, Heather Cole-Lewis, Darlene Neal, et al.
2023. Towards expert-level medical question answering with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.09617 (2023).
[42] Ankur Sinha and Tanmay Khandait. 2021. Impact of news on the commodity market: Dataset and results. In Advances in Information and
Communication: Proceedings of the 2021 Future of Information and Communication Conference (FICC), Volume 2 . Springer, 589–601.
[43] Xiaofei Sun, Xiaoya Li, Jiwei Li, Fei Wu, Shangwei Guo, Tianwei Zhang, and Guoyin Wang. 2023. Text classification via large language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.08377 (2023).
[44] Eugene Sy, Tzu-Cheng Peng, Shih-Hsuan Huang, Heng-Yu Lin, and Yung-Chun Chang. 2023. Fine-grained argument understanding with bert
ensemble techniques: A deep dive into financial sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of the 35th Conference on Computational Linguistics and Speech
Processing (ROCLING 2023). 242–249.
[45] Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Tianyi Zhang, Yann Dubois, Xuechen Li, Carlos Guestrin, Percy Liang, and Tatsunori B Hashimoto. 2023. Stanford
alpaca: An instruction-following llama model.


[Page 26]
, Fameti et al.
[46] Haochun Wang, Chi Liu, Nuwa Xi, Zewen Qiang, Sendong Zhao, Bing Qin, and Ting Liu. 2023. Huatuo: Tuning llama model with chinese medical
knowledge. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.06975 (2023).
[47] Xiao Wang, Weikang Zhou, Can Zu, Han Xia, Tianze Chen, Yuansen Zhang, Rui Zheng, Junjie Ye, Qi Zhang, Tao Gui, et al. 2023. InstructUIE:
multi-task instruction tuning for unified information extraction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.08085 (2023).
[48] Zengzhi Wang, Qiming Xie, Yi Feng, Zixiang Ding, Zinong Yang, and Rui Xia. 2023. Is ChatGPT a good sentiment analyzer? A preliminary study.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.04339 (2023).
[49] Jerry Wei, Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Dustin Tran, Albert Webson, Yifeng Lu, Xinyun Chen, Hanxiao Liu, Da Huang, Denny Zhou, et al . 2023. Larger
language models do in-context learning differently. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.03846 (2023).
[50] Shijie Wu, Ozan Irsoy, Steven Lu, Vadim Dabravolski, Mark Dredze, Sebastian Gehrmann, Prabhanjan Kambadur, David Rosenberg, and Gideon
Mann. 2023. Bloomberggpt: A large language model for finance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.17564 (2023).
[51] Chunli Xiang, Junchi Zhang, Fei Li, Hao Fei, and Donghong Ji. 2022. A semantic and syntactic enhanced neural model for financial sentiment
analysis. Information Processing & Management 59, 4 (2022), 102943.
[52] Qianqian Xie, Weiguang Han, Zhengyu Chen, Ruoyu Xiang, Xiao Zhang, Yueru He, Mengxi Xiao, Dong Li, Yongfu Dai, Duanyu Feng, et al. 2024.
The FinBen: An Holistic Financial Benchmark for Large Language Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.12659 (2024).
[53] Qianqian Xie, Weiguang Han, Yanzhao Lai, Min Peng, and Jimin Huang. 2023. The wall street neophyte: A zero-shot analysis of chatgpt over
multimodal stock movement prediction challenges. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.05351 (2023).
[54] Qianqian Xie, Weiguang Han, Xiao Zhang, Yanzhao Lai, Min Peng, Alejandro Lopez-Lira, and Jimin Huang. 2024. PIXIU: A Comprehensive
Benchmark, Instruction Dataset and Large Language Model for Finance. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36 (2024).
[55] Prateek Yadav, Derek Tam, Leshem Choshen, Colin Raffel, and Mohit Bansal. 2023. Resolving interference when merging models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2306.01708 2 (2023).
[56] Hongyang Yang, Xiao-Yang Liu, and Christina Dan Wang. 2023. Fingpt: Open-source financial large language models.arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.06031
(2023).
[57] Linyi Yang, Eoin M Kenny, Tin Lok James Ng, Yi Yang, Barry Smyth, and Ruihai Dong. 2020. Generating plausible counterfactual explanations for
deep transformers in financial text classification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.12512 (2020).
[58] Steve Yang, Jason Rosenfeld, and Jacques Makutonin. 2018. Financial aspect-based sentiment analysis using deep representations. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1808.07931 (2018).
[59] Yi Yang, Mark Christopher Siy Uy, and Allen Huang. 2020. Finbert: A pretrained language model for financial communications. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2006.08097 (2020).
[60] Li Yunxiang, Li Zihan, Zhang Kai, Dan Ruilong, and Zhang You. 2023. Chatdoctor: A medical chat model fine-tuned on llama model using medical
domain knowledge. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.14070 (2023).
[61] Boyu Zhang, Hongyang Yang, and Xiao-Yang Liu. 2023. Instruct-fingpt: Financial sentiment analysis by instruction tuning of general-purpose large
language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.12659 (2023).
[62] Boyu Zhang, Hongyang Yang, Tianyu Zhou, Muhammad Ali Babar, and Xiao-Yang Liu. 2023. Enhancing financial sentiment analysis via retrieval
augmented large language models. In Proceedings of the Fourth ACM International Conference on AI in Finance . 349–356.
[63] Shengyu Zhang, Linfeng Dong, Xiaoya Li, Sen Zhang, Xiaofei Sun, Shuhe Wang, Jiwei Li, Runyi Hu, Tianwei Zhang, Fei Wu, et al. 2023. Instruction
tuning for large language models: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.10792 (2023).
[64] Wenxuan Zhang, Yue Deng, Bing Liu, Sinno Jialin Pan, and Lidong Bing. 2023. Sentiment analysis in the era of large language models: A reality
check. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.15005 (2023).
[65] Yue Zhang, Leyang Cui, Deng Cai, Xinting Huang, Tao Fang, and Wei Bi. 2023. Multi-task instruction tuning of llama for specific scenarios: A
preliminary study on writing assistance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.13225 (2023).
[66] Qihuang Zhong, Liang Ding, Juhua Liu, Bo Du, and Dacheng Tao. 2023. Can chatgpt understand too? a comparative study on chatgpt and fine-tuned
bert. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.10198 (2023).
[67] Wenhao Zhu, Hongyi Liu, Qingxiu Dong, Jingjing Xu, Shujian Huang, Lingpeng Kong, Jiajun Chen, and Lei Li. 2023. Multilingual machine translation
with large language models: Empirical results and analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.04675 (2023).
APPENDIX
.1 Appendix A
We present statistics regarding the datasets utilized for instruction fine-tuning of both base and instruct models.
Subsequently, we provide descriptions of the instructions and prompt templates employed for each task during
instruction fine-tuning.


[Page 27]
A Comparative Analysis of Instruction Fine-Tuning LLMs for Financial Text Classification ,
Datasets Train Set Validation Set Test Set
FPB 3100 776 970
FiQA-SA 750 188 235
Headline-Dir 6493 928 1856
FinRED 5655 808 1616
FOMC 1785 199 496
FinArg-AUC-T1 - - 969
M&A - - 500
FinCausual‘20-T1 - - 800
Table 22. Training, validation and test set statistics used for instruction fine-tuning base and instruct models. ‘-’ denotes that the
dataset was not used in training.
Model Instruct Model Train Prompt Template Instruct Model Test Prompt Template
Llama3 <|user|> {instruction}
sentence: {input} <|end|>
<|assistant|>
label: {output} <|end|>
<|user|> {instruction}
sentence: {input} <|end|>
<|assistant|>
label:
Mistral <s> [INST] «SYS» {instruction} «/SYS»
Sentence: {input} [/INST]
label: {output} </s>
<s> [INST] «SYS» {instruction} «/SYS»
Sentence: {input} [/INST]
label:
Phi-3 <|begin_of_text|><|start_header_id|>
system<|end_header_id|>{instruction}
<|eot_id|>
<|start_header_id|>user<|end_header_id|>
Sentence:{input} <|eot_id|>
<|start_header_id|>assistant<|end_header_id|>
label: {output} <|eot_id|><|end_of_text|>
<|begin_of_text|><|start_header_id|>
system<|end_header_id|>{instruction}
<|eot_id|>
<|start_header_id|>user<|end_header_id|>
Sentence:{input} <|eot_id|>
<|start_header_id|>assistant<|end_header_id|>
label:
Table 23. Prompt templates for instruct models used in our instruction fine-tuning and test experiments. Instructions are obtained
from Table 25.
.2 Appendix B
We present the results of single-task fine-tuning of base and instruct models in Table 25 and Figures 7, 8, and 9. The
results indicate that single-task fine-tuning performs similarly to multi-task fine-tuning. In some datasets, single-task
fine-tuning even relatively outperforms multi-task fine-tuning for base models. For merging the models, we utilized
the single-task fine-tuned instruct models, which performed similarly to multi-task fine-tuned models, to alleviate the
degradation of zero-shot performance of fine-tuned models on unseen tasks.


[Page 28]
, Fameti et al.
Fig. 7. Performance comparison of vanilla models (zero-shot instruct models), single-task fine-tuned base models, multi-task fine-
tuned base models, single-task fine-tuned instruct models, and multi-task fine-tuned instruct models on five financial classification
datasets for Llama3-8B model. F1 score is reported.
Fig. 8. Performance comparison of vanilla models (zero-shot instruct models), single-task fine-tuned base models, multi-task fine-
tuned base models, single-task fine-tuned instruct models, and multi-task fine-tuned instruct models on five financial classification
datasets for Mistral-7B model. F1 score is reported.


[Page 29]
A Comparative Analysis of Instruction Fine-Tuning LLMs for Financial Text Classification ,
Base Model Train Prompt Template
Below is an instruction that describes a task, paired with an input that provides further context.
Write a response that appropriately completes the request.
###Instruction:
{instruction}
###Input:
{input}
###Response:
{output}
Table 24. Prompt templates for base models used in our instruction fine-tuning. Instructions are obtained from Table 25.
Fig. 9. Performance comparison of vanilla models (zero-shot instruct models), single-task fine-tuned instruct models, and multi-task
fine-tuned instruct models on five financial classification datasets for Phi-3 model. F1 score is reported.


[Page 30]
, Fameti et al.
Task Dataset Instruction
Sentiment analysis FPB, FiQA-SA You are a skilled financial analyst specialized in detecting mar-
ket sentiment from news sources. Your task is to evaluate the
sentiment of the following sentence and assign it one of the
labels: Positive, Negative, or Neutral. Return only a single word,
either Positive or Negative or Neutral.
News headline classification Headline-Dir You are a skilled financial analyst. Analyze the provided data
to identify the trend in price movements of gold. Determine if
the price is going up, down, or remaining stable. Return ’up’ if
the price is increasing, ’down’ if it’s decreasing, or ’stable’ if
it’s remaining relatively unchanged. Return only a single word,
either up or down or stable.
Relation extraction FinRED You are a skilled financial analyst. Utilize the input text as a
context reference, choose the right relationship between ’en-
tity1’ and ’entity2’ from the options. Return only a single word
from the Options. Options: founded by, chief executive officer,
employer, product/material produced, industry, owned by, sub-
sidiary, parent organization, manufacturer, brand, owner of,
developer, headquarters location, distribution format, original
broadcaster, legal form, location of formation, creator, stock
exchange, operator, publisher, distributed by, platform, member
of, position held, currency, director/manager, chairperson, busi-
ness division.
Hawkish-dovish classification FOMC You are an expert financial analyst. Classify the following sen-
tence from FOMC into ’HAWKISH’, ’DOVISH’, or ’NEUTRAL’
class. Label HAWKISH if it is corresponding to tightening of
the monetary policy, DOVISH if it is corresponding to easing
of the monetary policy, or NEUTRAL if the stance is neutral.
Argument unit classification FinArg-AUC-T1 You are an expert financial analyst. Analyze sentences from
earnings conference calls and identify their argumentative func-
tion. Each sentence is either a ’premise’, offering evidence or
reasoning, or a ‘claim’, asserting a conclusion or viewpoint. Re-
turn only a single word, either premise or claim.
Deal completeness classification M&A You are an expert financial analyst. In this task, you will be
given Mergers and Acquisitions (M&A) news articles or tweets.
Your task is to classify each article or tweet based on whether
the mentioned deal was completed or remained a rumour. Your
response should be a single word - either ‘complete’ or ‘rumour’
- representing the outcome of the deal mentioned in the provided
text. Return only a single word, either complete or rumour.
Causal classification FinCausual’20-T1 You are an expert financial analyst. In this task, you are provided
with sentences extracted from financial news and SEC data.
Your goal is to classify each sentence into either ‘causal’ or
‘noise’ based on whether or not it indicates a causal relationship
between financial events. Return only a single word, either
causal or noise.
Table 25. Example prompts for each task in our fine-tuning and test experiments


[Page 31]
A Comparative Analysis of Instruction Fine-Tuning LLMs for Financial Text Classification ,
Experiment Model FPB FiQA-SA Headline-Dir FinRED FOMC FinArg M&A SC
Acc F1 Acc F1 F1 F1 F1 F1 F1 F1
Vanilla Models
Llama3-8B 77.5 76.7 71.1 72.9 72.3 6.5 47.4 50.2 85.9 66.7
Mistral-7B 73.4 69.8 45.9 54.8 77.6 20.5 38.6 42.2 83.6 68.8
Phi-3-mini 72.8 72.9 72.7 74.8 87.1 24.8 48.5 54.1 80.1 66.5
ST-Base-FT Llama3-8B 84.7 84.8 88.1 88.2 95.6 74.3 67.7 - - -
Mistral-7B 85.2 85.3 85.9 86.5 95.3 70.1 71.1 - - -
MT-Base-FT Llama3-8B 79.1 79.4 87.2 85.3 95.3 69.1 68.7 23.4 72.5 52.6
Mistral-7B 86.8 86.6 85.5 85.1 95.5 76.4 67.1 13.4 70.9 31.8
ST-Instruct-FT
Llama3-8B 81.1 79.5 78.7 81.4 95.5 73.2 67.6 - - -
Mistral-7B 84.6 84.8 85.5 83.9 95.4 67.3 68.3 - - -
Phi-3-mini 83.4 82.5 76.6 79.1 95.6 69.2 66.3 - - -
MT-Instruct-FT
Llama3-8B 86.2 86.3 86.4 86.6 95 73.4 68.4 31.1 72.9 39.2
Mistral-7B 86.3 86.2 85.1 83.9 95.2 69.4 70.2 35.1 76.1 57.6
Phi-3-mini 84.7 84.1 79.5 81.5 95.6 67.2 66.5 53.5 77.7 64.9
Merged Models Llama3-8B 80.6 80.7 75.3 78.3 93.2 44.6 60.9 54.6 74.3 65.5
Mistral-7B 80.4 80.3 65.1 72.1 91.6 41.2 38.9 50.4 83.5 59.6
Table 26. Main experimental results for four financial classification tasks and three unseen financial classification tasks (FinArg,
M&A, Casual-SC). Vanilla models indicate the zero-shot performance of instruct models. ST-Base-FT refers to single-task fine-tuned
base models, and ST-Instruct-FT refers to single-task fine-tuned instruct models. MT-Base-FT refers to multi-task fine-tuned base
models, and MT-Instruct-FT refers to multi-task fine-tuned instruct models.