[Page 1]
Decomposing Retrieval Failures in RAG for Long-Document
Financial Question Answering
Amine Kobeissi†,‡, * , Philippe Langlais†,‡
† Department of Computer Science and Operations Research, Université de Montréal
‡ RALI
* amine.kobeissi@umontreal.ca
Abstract
Retrieval-augmented generation is increasingly used for financial question answering over
long regulatory filings, yet reliability depends on retrieving the exact context needed
to justify answers in high stakes settings. We study a frequent failure mode in which
the correct document is retrieved but the page or chunk that contains the answer is
missed, leading the generator to extrapolate from incomplete context. Despite its practical
significance, this within-document retrieval failure mode has received limited systematic
attention in the Financial Question Answering (QA) literature. We evaluate retrieval at
multiple levels of granularity, document, page, and chunk level, and introduce an oracle
based analysis to provide empirical upper bounds on retrieval and generative performance.
On a 150 question subset of FinanceBench, we reproduce and compare diverse retrieval
strategies including dense, sparse, hybrid, and hierarchical methods with reranking and
query reformulation. Across methods, gains in document discovery tend to translate into
stronger page recall, yet oracle performance still suggests headroom for page and chunk
level retrieval. To target this gap, we introduce a domain fine-tuned page scorer that
treats pages as an intermediate retrieval unit between documents and chunks. Unlike prior
passage-based hierarchical retrieval, we fine-tune a bi-encoder specifically for page-level
relevance on financial filings, exploiting the semantic coherence of pages. Overall, our
results demonstrate a significant improvement in page recall and chunk retrieval.
Keywords:Retrieval-AugmentedGeneration, InformationRetrieval, FinancialQuestion
Answering, Natural Language Processing, Large Language Models
1.Introduction
Large language models often produce fluent and accurate answers, yet domain specific tasks
such as financial question answering require verifiable grounding in long source documents.
Retrieval augmented generation (RAG) addresses this by selecting candidate passages from
a corpus and generating an answer conditioned on those passages. In this setting, retrieval
quality is the main determinant of whether an answer is supported by the correct context.
In practice, retrieval success is not a single concept. A pipeline can retrieve the correct
filing and still miss the page or chunk that contains the answer, especially in long reports
with repeated templates, dense tables, and similar sections over years. Thus, when the
correct chunks are not retrieved, the generator can produce plausible but incorrect responses.
Furthermore, document-level metrics can obscure cases where the correct document is
retrieved but the answer-bearing context is missed, and generation metrics (answer accuracy,
ROUGE-L) do not directly distinguish retrieval from generation failures. For example, low
answer accuracy could stem from either retrieving wrong chunks or from generation errors
given the correct chunks. We address this with page and chunk retrieval metrics and oracle
bounds that separate document discovery from within-document context retrieval
We study this failure mode in financial question answering over U.S. Securities and
Exchange Commission (SEC) filings using FinanceBench [1]. We propose an oracle based
analysis that quantifies how much performance is lost due to imperfect document versus
imperfect page or chunk retrieval inside the correct filing. The potential benefits of this idea
can be visualized in Figure 1, where we compare retrieval performance in different settings.
Since retrieval quality ultimately determines generation quality, we use BLEU [2] and
ROUGE-L [3] between retrieved chunks and gold chunks as proxies for retrieval performance.
arXiv:2602.17981v1  [cs.CL]  20 Feb 2026


[Page 2]
Figure 1.Maximum BLEU and ROUGE-L scores between retrieved chunks and gold
chunks under standard retrieval and oracle settings
We can see that standard RAG pipelines are inadequate compared to oracle settings, revealing
the retrieval gap.
Contributions.
(1) We define an oracle-based retrieval gap analysis that decomposes retrieval into document,
page, and within page (chunk) discovery.
(2) We provide a comprehensive evaluation of common retrieval strategies on a shared multi
document index for FinanceBench, including dense, sparse, hybrid, hierarchical retrieval,
query reformulation, and reranking.
(3) We introduce a domain fine-tuned page scorer that ranks pages before chunk retrieval,
providing a novel approach to close the retrieval gap.
(4) We analyze performance by document type, and question type, showing that retrieval
difficulty varies across categories.
2.Related Work
Retrieval augmented generation combines retrieval with conditional generation to improve
factuality and traceability by grounding answers in retrieved text [4]. In long document
settings, retrieval quality becomes the main bottleneck because many passages are topically
similar while only a small subset contains answer bearing context [5]. This motivates
evaluations that measure not only whether the correct source document is found, but also
whether retrieval locates the optimal page and chunk region needed for a verifiable answer.
Financial question answering is challenging because filings are long, semi structured, and
numerically sensitive. Benchmarks such as as FinQA [6], TAT-QA [7], and ConvFinQA [8]
emphasize numerical reasoning, often requiring multi-step computation grounded in tables
and narrative context. FinanceBench adds gold evidence annotations in SEC filings and
supports evidence-based evaluation at scale [1]. Newer retrieval oriented suites such SEC-
QA [9] further highlight practical workflows where users require both the answer and the
supporting retrieval context.
Retrieval for filings typically relies on chunking plus sparse, dense, or hybrid retrieval, query
reformulation, and reranking. Recent work has emphasized the importance of domain-adapted
preprocessing and retrieval strategies for financial documents. Kim et al. [10] propose a three-
phase pipeline that combines query expansion, corpus preprocessing, hybrid retrieval with
fine-tuned embedders, and a DPO-trained reranker with document selection. Evaluated across
several financial QA datasets, their method achieves substantial improvements in retrieval
precision. Wang et al. [11] introduce FinSage, a multi-aspect RAG framework that unifies
multi-modal preprocessing, multi-path retrieval and a domain-specialized reranker, achieving
strong retrieval results and improvements in accuracy over baselines on FinanceBench.


[Page 3]
While these systems demonstrate strong end-to-end performance, they do not explicitly
decompose retrieval failures into document discovery versus within-document retrieval. Our
work complements this by introducing an oracle-based analysis that separately quantifies
headroom from imperfect document retrieval and imperfect page or chunk retrieval within
the correct filing. We show that while methods like HyDE and reranking improve document
discovery, substantial page and chunk retrieval gaps remain. To address this, we introduce a
domain fine-tuned page scorer that explicitly addresses granular page level retrieval, providing
a diagnostic framework to measure and close the retrieval gap in financial question answering.
3.Data and Experimental Setup
3.1.Dataset
We use the open source subset of FinanceBench with 150 questions. Each sample includes
a question, a reference answer, and ground truth annotations that identify the gold document
and page numbers. We treat the gold pages asP ⋆ during evaluation. Table 1 shows a
simplified instance from FinanceBench.
Field V alue
Company Amcor
DocumentAMCOR_2020_10K
Question type Metrics Generated
Reasoning Information Extraction
Question What is Amcor’s year end FY2020 net AR (in USD millions)? Address the
question by adopting the perspective of a financial analyst who can only use the
details shown within the balance sheet.
Answer $1616.00
Evidence page 49
Evidence text Amcor plc and Subsidiaries Consolidated Balance Sheet (in millions) As of June
30, 2020 2019 Assets Current assets: Cash and cash equivalents $ 742.6 $ 601.6
Trade receivables, net1,615.91,864.3 Inventories...
Table 1.Instance from FinanceBench. Evidence text is the gold passage for retrieval1
FinanceBench includes three question types: domain relevant, metrics generated, and
novel generated. Domain relevant questions often require locating narrative statements and
may reference multiple periods, and are generic questions relevant to financial analysis of a
publicly-traded companies. Metrics generated questions (as in Table 1) require tight retrieval
to the right statement or table to extract base figures for downstream calculation, they
require computation and reasoning over different financial figures. Novel generated questions
are designed to involve reasoning and are very specific to the company, industry, and report
in question. They were designed to require reasoning and not to be purely extractive.
FinanceBench also draws from multiple document types. We report results by document
type because retrieval difficulty can differ between annual reports and quarterly reports due
to length and section structure. The documents along with their proportion in the data are
10K (74.7%), 10Q (10%), Earnings (9.3%), and 8K (6%) reports.
3.2.T ask Setup
Figure 2 illustrates the overall RAG pipeline evaluated in this work. LetD = {d1, . . . , dD}
be a set of documents. Each documentd∈ D contains n pages {pd
1, . . . , pd
n}, we extract the
1Evidence text is a passage from the evidence (gold) page containing the answer bearing information.


[Page 4]
page from the PDF document using the FinanceBench preprocessing2. We build a chunk
corpus C by splitting page text into overlapping spans, where the text is of 1024 tokens and
overlap of 128 tokens3. Each chunk is a tuple(c, d, p)with chunk text c, document idd, and
a 0-indexed page numberp. For a queryq, a retriever produces a ranked list of chunks,
Rk(q) = Topk (c,d,p)∈C s(q, c) ={(c i, di, pi)}k
i=1,
where s is a scoring function. The generator produces an answer ˆy= Gθ(q,R k(q)).
FinanceBench provides a gold documentd⋆ and gold pagesP ⋆ for each query.
Figure 2.Overview of RAG pipeline. Documents are decomposed into pages and chunks.
For a query, blue pages and chunks represent the gold context containing the answer.
3.3.Oracle Retrieval Conditions
We define three retrieval settings that differ by candidate restriction. First, standard
retrieval, where we retrieve over the entire search space. Second, Oracle document retrieval,
where the candidates in the search space are restricted to the gold filing document,Cdoc(d⋆) =
{(c, d, p) ∈ C |d = d⋆}. Third, Oracle page retrieval, where candidates are restricted to the
gold filing and gold pages,Cpage(d⋆, P ⋆) = {(c, d, p) ∈ C |d = d⋆, p∈P ⋆}, resulting in a
near complete reduction of noise.
These conditions provide empirical upper bounds. The Oracle document setting quantifies
headroom due to imperfect page and chunk discovery. The Oracle page setting quantifies
headroom due to imperfect chunk retrieval when the gold pages and documents are known.
Evaluating both bounds helps isolate where errors arise. More broadly, oracle bounds provide
a common reference across systems. The gap to oracle normalizes for pipeline differences
and contextualizes raw scores.
3.4.Evaluation Metrics
For each questionq, FinanceBench provides a gold filingd⋆(q)and a set of gold pages
P ⋆(q). Let the topk retrieved chunks beRk(q) = {(ci, di, pi)}k
i=1, where di and pi denote
the filing id and page index of chunkci.
First, we measure document recall. Since each question has a single gold filing, document
recall atkis equivalent to hit,
DocRec@k(q) =I

d⋆(q)∈ {d i}k
i=1

.
Then, we measure page recall atk, where there can be many gold pages.
PageRec@k(q) =
P ⋆(q)∩ {p i |d i =d ⋆(q)}k
i=1

|P ⋆(q)| .
2https://github.com/patronus-ai/financebench
3Following Yepes et al. [12], and our ablations, we find that larger chunk sizes aid in Financial RAG


[Page 5]
Finally, as a chunk-level proxy, we compute the maximum ROUGE-L [3] and BLEU [2]
similarity between any retrieved chunk and the gold evidence concatenated into a single
reference text,e ⋆(q). Given the top-kretrieved chunks{c i}k
i=1, for each query we report
CtxROUGE-L@k(q) = max
i∈{1,...,k}
ROUGE-L(ci, e⋆(q)),
and analogously CtxBLEU@k(q)using BLEU. To evaluate the generator, ROUGE-L scores
on the generated output against the reference answer are used along with a numeric match
for metric based questions. To calculate the numeric match, given a reference answery⋆
and a model predictionˆy, we extract sets of numbersR = Nums(y⋆)and P = Nums(ˆy)
using a regular expression after removing commas and currency symbols. We count an
example as a numeric match if there existr∈R and p∈P such thatr and p are close under
numpy.isclose4, usingatol= 0.03andrtol= 0.03.
We report macro averages over all 150 questions and usek = 5throughout the evaluation,
other than for numeric match which is only reported on the 50 metrics generated questions.
3.5.Generation Setup
The generator model, prompt template, and decoding settings are fixed across all retrieval
methods. We use Qwen-2.5-7B-Instruct as our generator model. The prompt template used
can be found in Appendix A.
4.Methodology and Approach
We evaluate a suite of retrieval strategies designed to improve document, page, and chunk
level discovery. All strategies share the same task setup as described in section 3.2. For
dense methods we use a sharedChromaDB5 vector store built once per configuration. The
implementation is model agnostic and supports embedding backbones such asBGE-M3 [13].
Chunks are stored in a singleChromaDBcollection, and retrieval usessimilarity_search.
4.1.Dense Retrieval
Dense retrieval maps a query and each chunk to a shared vector space [14] and ranks
chunks by vector similarity. LetE(·)be the embedding model andc a chunk. We compute a
query embedding E(q)and retrieve the top k chunks by cosine similarity. All dense variants
differ only in the choice of embedding backbone while sharing the same vector store, chunk
size and overlap, and chunk metadata.
4.2.Sparse retrieval
Sparse retrieval excels at keyword matching and interpretability, thus offering potential
advantages for Financial QA. We test BM25 [15] as a sparse baseline and SPLADE [16] as a
learned sparse retriever that produces sparse term weighted vectors. BM25 is implemented
using rank-bm256. Tokenization uses a finance oriented preprocessing function that preserves
currency symbols, percents, and financial tokens such as numbers with commas and decimals.
The retriever returns the topk chunks with the highest BM25 scores. SPLADE uses the
checkpoint naver/splade-cocondenser-ensembledistil. Due to architectural constraints
of the checkpoint, we truncate inputs to 512 tokens, and we keep the topN = 256weighted
terms for efficiency. The token truncation may impact SPLADE results since it sees less
4https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/generated/numpy.isclose.html
5https://github.com/chroma-core/chroma
6https://github.com/dorianbrown/rank_bm25


[Page 6]
context per chunk than methods with 1024 tokens. Retrieval ranks chunks by sparse dot
product between query and chunk vectors.
4.3.Hybrid F usion
We combine dense and sparse ranked lists using Reciprocal Rank Fusion [17]. Letrankr(c)
be the rank of chunkcunder retrieverr. Then RRF assigns
sRRF(c) =
X
r∈M
1
krrf +rank r(c) ,
where krrf = 60and method are equally weighted. To fuse and compare outputs robustly
across systems, we align chunks using stable SHA1 hashes computed from normalized chunk
text concatenated with metadata fields for source and page. This creates consistent keys
even when different retrievers produce results through different internal data structures.
4.4.Query Reformulation, HyDE and Multi-HyDE
Lexical mismatch between short questions and filing language is common, particularly
when the question uses conversational phrasing while filings use formal accounting terminology.
To address this challenge, we attempt three approaches. First, we apply a deterministic
query expansion baseline for retrieval, while generation uses the original question. We
expand common finance acronyms by appending an expanded version, for example CAPEX
becomes capital expenditure, and PPE becomes property plant equipment. We also normalize
temporal expressions such as FY2018, or FY18 into a canonical form fiscal year 2018.
For the other two methods, we follow HyDE and its multi sample variant proposed in
the literature [18, 19]. HyDE generates a hypothetical passage intended to resemble the
target context, then retrieves using the embedding of that passage rather than the raw query
embedding. We use Qwen-2.5-7B-Instruct as our LLM to generate the hypothetical passages.
We set temperature to 0.7 to encourage diversity in the outputs and cap the generated
passage to 200 tokens. The prompt uses the following template,
Please write a short financial report excerpt (1 paragraph) that precisely
answers the question below. Do not introduce the text, just write the excerpt.
Question: {question}
Passage:
For Multi-HyDE we use the same set up as HyDE but generate 4 hypothetical passages
{hi}4
i=1, embed each passage, then form a single query vector¯hto perform the search,
¯h= 1
4
4X
i=1
E(hi).
4.5.Hierarchical Retrieval
Hierarchical retrieval addresses long context by retrieving at a coarse granularity and
then refining at a finer granularity within the retrieved region. Recent work targets fine
grained retrieval in financial filings via a hierarchical approach, often taking the form of
document retrieval followed by passage retrieval, with additional refinement aggregation [5,
20, 21]. We implement a simple Parent-Child style hierarchy that retrieves child chunks
at a fine granularity, then maps to larger parent chunks for generation context. We index
small child chunks for retrieval and maintain a deterministic mapping from each child to a
larger parent span. After retrieving children, we deduplicate by parent id and return up to


[Page 7]
k unique parents. A parent score is derived from its children by taking the best similarity
score among children assigned to that parent, then ranking parents accordingly.
4.6.Cross-Encoder Reranking
In long filings, reranking can help separate near duplicate regions and improve retrieved
context ordering after a high recall first stage, which is important when multiple sections con-
tain similar language across years or business segments [21]. We add a second stage reranker
using BAAI/bge-reranker-v2-m3. For each query we first retrieveN = 20candidates from
a base retriever, then rerank with the cross-encoder and keep the topk.
4.7.Page-then-Chunk Retrieval
We propose a hierarchical retrieval method that identifies relevant pages and then retrieves
chunks only from those pages, reducing noise from irrelevant sections while preserving fine-
grained context retrieval. To do this, we fine-tune a bi-encoder to identify optimal pages
while enabling efficient inference through pre-computed page embeddings. The method has
two stages. Stage one ranks pages in the corpus and returns the topP pages. Stage two
runs a retriever over chunks whose metadata matches the selected pages.
For each filingd, we extract the text of each pagep and apply a deterministic normalization
function N(·)that collapses whitespace and truncates long pages to a fixed length. We set
the maximum length toM = 2000characters. The learned page scorer replaces a pretrained
page encoder with a fine-tuned bi-encoder. LetText(d, p)be the page text of a document, we
compute their embeddings fromN(Text(d, p)). For the scoring function, we train a bi-encoder
Eθp initialized from BAAI/BGE-M3 that maps queries and pages into a shared vector space.
The learned page relevance score is the cosine similarity of the learned embedding of the page
and query, spage(q, d, p) = cos

Eθp(q), E θp
 
NText(d, p)

. At inference, pages are ranked
bys page and the topPpages are passed to the chunk stage.
For each questionq, FinanceBench provides a gold filingd⋆(q)and a set of gold page
indices P ⋆(q). To train, we construct positives by pairing each question with every annotated
page in its gold filing,S = {(q, (d⋆(q), p+)) |p + ∈P ⋆(q)}. During training, we sample
minibatches from the training subset ofS and apply contrastive learning7 to fine-tune the
embedding model Eθp using the Multiple Negatives Ranking loss with in-batch negatives [22].
For a minibatch of sizeB with positive pairs{(qi, (d⋆
i , p+
i ))}B
i=1 sampled from S, the loss is
LMNR =− 1
B
BX
i=1

spage(qi, d⋆
i , p+
i )−log
BX
j=1
exp
 
spage(qi, d⋆
j , p+
j )


 .
For eachqi, its paired gold page is the positive target, and all other pages in the minibatch
are negatives.
We train8 the page scorer using document-level splits to prevent data leakage, ensuring no
document appears in both training and evaluation sets. We perform 5-fold cross-validation,
partitioning the questions by their source documents. For each fold, we train on 80% and
evaluate on the remaining 20% of documents. Training uses a learning rate of 2e-5, batch
size of 16, and 15 epochs. Final metrics are aggregated across all folds.
7https://huggingface.co/blog/dragonkue/mitigating-false-negatives-in-retriever-training
8Experiments were run on a RTX 3090 GPU with 32GB memory.


[Page 8]
4.7.1.Inference and Integration with Chunk Retrieval
After training, we embed every page in the corpus withEθp and index them with(d, p)
metadata. At inference, given query q, we retrieve the topP = 20pages (via ablation
in Appendix B) underspage, filter chunks to only those from selected pages, then apply
chunk-level retrieval to select the final topk chunks for generation. This targets page-level
relevance while preserving fine-grained chunk selection. Algorithm 1 provides the routine.
Algorithm 1Page-then-chunk retrieval using fine tuned page scorer
Require: Query q, Fine tuned page encoderEθp, Chunk encoderEchunk, P pages, k chunks
Require:Page indexI page storing entries
 
(d, p), vpage
d,p

wherev page
d,p =E θp
 
N(Text(d, p))

is computed offline once
Require:Chunk indexI chunk storing entries
 
c, vchunk
c , d c, p c

wherev chunk
c =E chunk(c)is computed offline once
1:Stage 1: Page retrieval
2:e page
q ←E θp(q)
3:P P (q)←Search cos
 
Ipage, epage
q , P

▷Nearest neighbor search over storedvpage
d,p
4:Stage 2: Chunk retrieval on filtered search space
5:e chunk
q ←E chunk(q)
6:C filt ← {c∈ I chunk |(d c, pc)∈ P P (q)}
7:R k(q)←Search cos
 
Cfilt, echunk
q , k

▷Search over storedv chunk
c in the filtered pool
8:returnR k(q)
5.Results and Analysis
5.1.Oracle Results
Table 2 reports oracle document and oracle page results atk = 5using BAAI/BGE-M3.
Under the oracle document setting, we have a page recall of 0.60, as well as a BLEU score of
0.25 and ROUGE-L of 0.42. When restricting the search space in the oracle page experiment,
the BLEU and ROUGE-L scores increase, meaning that we are retrieving better context. The
numeric answer accuracy also increases under the oracle page setting, indicating expectedly
that down stream generation improves when the correct page is located. These results
provide empirical upper bounds for the remaining experiments.
SettingDocRec@5PageRec@5 Max BLEU@5 Max ROUGE-L@5 Numeric Match
Oracle document 1.00 0.60 0.25 0.42 0.26
Oracle page 1.00 1.00 0.40 0.59 0.34
Table 2.Oracle results. Evaluation metrics defined in section 3.4.
5.2.Retrieval Results
We report aggregated retrieval performance on all 150 questions in Table 3. Across all
methods, page recall substantially lags document recall, revealing that while baseline methods
successfully identify the correct filing, they struggle to find answer-bearing context within it.
Consistent with prior work, dense retrieval outperforms sparse methods on FinanceBench [10],
likely due to lexical mismatch between queries and formal filing language. Among baselines,
BGE-M3 combined with Multi-HyDE and reranking performs best (0.46 page recall), showing


[Page 9]
that query reformulation and cross-encoder scoring effectively improve within-document
retrieval. However, in terms of page recall, this method is still 0.14 away from the Oracle
Document upper bound of 0.60, demonstrating the retrieval gap. Our learned page scorer
achieves 0.55 page recall, outperforming baselines and closing the page recall gap to 0.05
for the oracle document setting. We also achieve the highest chunk-level BLEU (0.33) and
ROUGE-L (0.46) scores, outperforming all baselines and Oracle Document. This validates
that page-level filtering improves retrieval quality over direct chunk search.
MethodDocRec@5PageRec@5 Max BLEU@5 Max ROUGE-L@5
Dense baseline BGE-M3 0.88 0.34 0.26 0.35
BM25 0.32 0.07 0.04 0.12
SPLADE 0.50 0.16 0.18 0.29
Hybrid fusion (BM25 + BGE-M3) 0.61 0.23 0.13 0.27
Parent-Child 0.31 0.13 0.12 0.22
Query expansion 0.68 0.27 0.08 0.24
HyDE 0.86 0.40 0.25 0.37
Multi-HyDE 0.85 0.42 0.27 0.39
BGE-M3 + ReRanker 0.87 0.41 0.19 0.34
BGE-M3 + Multi-HyDE + ReRanker 0.93 0.46 0.28 0.40
Learned page scorer (Ours)0.95 0.55 0.33 0.46
Table 3.Aggregated retrieval performance over 150 FinanceBench samples atk= 5.
5.3.Breakdown by Question and Document Type
We report page and document recall by question type. Figure 3 demonstrates that
performance varies significantly by question type. On metrics questions, our learned page
scorer with a page recall of 0.81 exceeds Oracle Document page recall of 0.68, despite both
achieving perfect document recall. This occurs because metrics questions target financial
tables and numerical statements that appear in structurally predictable sections, allowing the
domain-tuned page embeddings to effectively retrieve the correct page. Conversely, domain
and novel questions show larger gaps to their oracle bounds, as these require narrative
context that is harder to capture and face different retrieval challenges.
Figure 3.Document and page recall atk= 5by question type. 50 questions per type
As shown in Table 4, performance varies substantially by filing type. On 10K filings, which
comprise 75% of our dataset, the learned page scorer achieves 0.62 page recall, exceeding
both the best baseline (0.45) and Oracle Document (0.56). The strong performance on 10Ks
is likely due to the sample size in the training data and reflects the consistent structure and


[Page 10]
length of annual reports. In contrast, performance on Earnings call (EC) transcripts is weak
(0.10), falling far short of the oracle bound (0.64) and baseline (0.36). Earnings calls have
less standardized structure and evidence may appear in conversational Q&A sections that
differ from the training data. Performance on 10Q and 8K filings also underperformed the
baseline, likely due to limited representation of these document types in training data.
10K (n=112) 10Q (n=15) 8K (n=9) EC (n=14)
Method D@5 P@5 D@5 P@5 D@5 P@5 D@5 P@5
BGE-M3 + Multi-HyDE + ReRanker 0.96 0.45 0.87 0.47 0.89 0.78 0.86 0.36
Learned Page Scorer (Ours) 0.97 0.62 0.87 0.40 0.89 0.56 0.86 0.10
Oracle Document 1.00 0.56 1.00 0.60 1.00 0.89 1.00 0.64
Table 4.Document (D@5) and page (P@5) recall atk = 5by filing type. EC is Earnings.
5.4.Generative Results
Despite improvements in page recall, it is important to evaluate whether downstream
generation benefits from better evidence retrieval. Table 5 shows answer quality using
Qwen-2.5-7B-Instruct. Our learned page scorer achieves 0.30 numeric match accuracy,
outperforming the best baseline (12%) and oracle document (26%), while also improving
ROUGE-L scores over strongest baseline (0.15 vs 0.07), supporting our results from Figure 3,
where our method outperformed the Oracle Document setting on metrics question. This
suggests that page-level filtering successfully targets pages containing the numerical evidence
needed for accurate calculation, while maintaining answer quality across both extractive and
reasoning questions.
Method ROUGE-L Numeric Match
BGE-M3 + Multi-HyDE + ReRanker 0.07 0.12
Learned Page Scorer (Ours) 0.15 0.30
Oracle Doc 0.16 0.26
Oracle Page 0.20 0.34
Table 5.Generative results. Numeric match follows tolerance from FinanceBench
6.Conclusion
We introduced an oracle-based framework to decompose retrieval failures in financial
question answering, separating document discovery from page and chunk level retrieval
within the correct filing. Across diverse retrieval strategies on FinanceBench, we find that
while current methods improve document recall, page-level retrieval gaps remain even when
the correct document is retrieved. To address this bottleneck, we introduce a page scorer
that ranks pages within a document and then restricts chunk retrieval to the top ranked
pages. Our approach achieves 55% page recall, outperforming all baseline methods as well
as Oracle Document retrieval on metrics generated questions. This shows that explicit
page-level modeling with domain-specific training improves within-document retrieval more
effectively than direct chunk matching, even with perfect document discovery.
Our study evaluates 150 questions from FinanceBench, predominantly 10-K filings, limiting
generalization to other document types or domains. This motivates the need to evaluate our


[Page 11]
approach on other benchmarks or the full FinanceBench dataset. The page scorer requires
gold annotations and relies on random in-batch negatives during training, in the future hard
negative mining could improve results. Answer evaluation uses ROUGE-L and numeric
matching, which may not fully capture correctness in financial contexts. Finally, generative
results are based on one LLM, using larger or different models may impact generative results.
Promising directions include combining page scoring with reranking or query augmentation,
reinforcement learning for iterative retrieval, incorporating document structure metadata,
and extending to multi-document questions requiring cross-filing context aggregation.
AppendixA.Generator Prompt Template
System: You are a financial analyst assistant. Your task is to provide
accurate, concise, and well-supported answers to questions based on provided
financial document segments.
Context: {retrieved_evidence}
Question: {query}
Answer:
AppendixB.Learned Page Scorer Performance by P
PDocRec@5PageRec@5 Max BLEU@5 Max ROUGE-L@5
5 0.92 0.48 0.30 0.44
10 0.95 0.48 0.31 0.44
20 0.95 0.55 0.33 0.46
Table 6.P value ablation for learned page scorer
References
[1] P. Islam, A. Kannappan, D. Kiela, R. Qian, N. Scherrer, and B. Vidgen.FinanceBench: A
New Benchmark for Financial Question Answering. 2023. arXiv: 2311.11944[cs.CL].
[2] K. Papineni, S. Roukos, T. Ward, and W.-J. Zhu. “Bleu: a method for automatic evaluation
of machine translation”. In:Proceedings of the 40th annual meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics. 2002, pp. 311–318.
[3] C.-Y. Lin. “ROUGE: A Package for Automatic Evaluation of Summaries”. In:Text Summa-
rization Branches Out. Barcelona, Spain: Association for Computational Linguistics, 2004,
pp. 74–81.
[4] P. Lewis, E. Perez, A. Piktus, F. Petroni, V. Karpukhin, N. Goyal, H. Küttler, M. Lewis,
W.-t. Yih, T. Rocktäschel, et al. “Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive nlp
tasks”. In:Advances in neural information processing systems33 (2020), pp. 9459–9474.
[5] G. Izacard and E. Grave. “Leveraging Passage Retrieval with Generative Models for Open
Domain Question Answering”. In:Proceedings of the 16th Conference of the European Chapter
of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Main Volume. Online: Association for
Computational Linguistics, 2021, pp. 874–880.doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.eacl-main.74.
[6] Z. Chen, W. Chen, C. Smiley, S. Shah, I. Borova, D. Langdon, R. Moussa, M. I. Beane, T.-H. K.
Huang, B. R. Routledge, and W. Y. Wang. “FinQA: A Dataset of Numerical Reasoning over
Financial Data”. In:ArXivabs/2109.00122 (2021).


[Page 12]
[7] F. Zhu, W. Lei, Y. Huang, C. Wang, S. Zhang, J. Lv, F. Feng, and T.-S. Chua. “TAT-QA: A
Question Answering Benchmark on a Hybrid of Tabular and Textual Content in Finance”.
In:Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long
Papers). Ed. by C. Zong, F. Xia, W. Li, and R. Navigli. Online: Association for Computational
Linguistics, 2021, pp. 3277–3287.doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.acl-long.254.
[8] Z. Chen, S. Li, C. Smiley, Z. Ma, S. Shah, and W. Y. Wang. “Convfinqa: Exploring the chain
of numerical reasoning in conversational finance question answering”. In:Proceedings of the
2022 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing. 2022, pp. 6279–6292.
[9] V. D. Lai, M. Krumdick, C. Lovering, V. Reddy, C. Schmidt, and C. Tanner.SEC-QA: A
Systematic Evaluation Corpus for Financial QA. 2024. arXiv: 2406.14394[cs.CL].
[10] S. Kim, H. Song, H. Seo, and H. Kim.Optimizing Retrieval Strategies for Financial Question
Answering Documents in Retrieval-Augmented Generation Systems. 2025. arXiv: 2503.15191
[cs.IR].
[11] X. Wang, J. Chi, Z. Tai, T. S. T. Kwok, H. He, Z. Li, Y. Hua, M. Li, P. Lu, S. Wang, et al.
“Finsage: A multi-aspect rag system for financial filings question answering”. In:Proceedings
of the 34th ACM International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management. 2025,
pp. 6144–6152.
[12] A. J. Yepes, Y. You, J. Milczek, S. Laverde, and R. Li.Financial Report Chunking for Effective
Retrieval Augmented Generation. 2024. arXiv: 2402.05131[cs.CL].
[13] J. Chen, S. Xiao, P. Zhang, K. Luo, D. Lian, and Z. Liu.M3-Embedding: Multi-Linguality,
Multi-Functionality, Multi-Granularity Text Embeddings Through Self-Knowledge Distillation.
2025. arXiv: 2402.03216[cs.CL].
[14] V. Karpukhin, B. Oguz, S. Min, P. S. Lewis, L. Wu, S. Edunov, D. Chen, and W.-t. Yih.
“Dense Passage Retrieval for Open-Domain Question Answering.” In:"Proceedings of the
2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP)". 2020,
pp. 6769–6781.
[15] S. E. Robertson and H. Zaragoza. “The Probabilistic Relevance Framework: BM25 and Beyond”.
In:Found. Trends Inf. Retr.3 (2009), pp. 333–389.
[16] T. Formal, B. Piwowarski, and S. Clinchant. “SPLADE: Sparse lexical and expansion model
for first stage ranking”. In:Proceedings of the 44th International ACM SIGIR Conference on
Research and Development in Information Retrieval. 2021, pp. 2288–2292.
[17] G. V. Cormack, C. L. Clarke, and S. Buettcher. “Reciprocal rank fusion outperforms condorcet
and individual rank learning methods”. In:Proceedings of the 32nd international ACM SIGIR
conference on Research and development in information retrieval. 2009, pp. 758–759.
[18] L. Gao, X. Ma, J. Lin, and J. Callan. “Precise zero-shot dense retrieval without relevance
labels”. In:Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers). 2023, pp. 1762–1777.
[19] R. George, A. G. Srinivasan, J. K. Joe, H. MR, H. Kant, R. Vimalkanth, S. Suresh, et al.
“Enhancing Financial RAG with Agentic AI and Multi-HyDE: A Novel Approach to Knowledge
Retrieval and Hallucination Reduction”. In:Proceedings of The 10th Workshop on Financial
Technology and Natural Language Processing. 2025, pp. 19–32.
[20] J.Choe,J.Kim,andW.Jung.“HierarchicalRetrievalwithEvidenceCurationforOpen-Domain
Financial Question Answering on Standardized Documents”. In:Findings of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2025,
16663–16681.doi: 10.18653/v1/2025.findings-acl.855.
[21] Y. Li, M. Wang, M. de Carvalho, S. Sabanis, and T. Ma.FinGEAR: Financial Mapping-Guided
Enhanced Answer Retrieval. 2025. arXiv: 2509.12042[cs.CE].
[22] M. Henderson, R. Al-Rfou, B. Strope, Y. hsuan Sung, L. Lukacs, R. Guo, S. Kumar, B. Miklos,
and R. Kurzweil.Efficient Natural Language Response Suggestion for Smart Reply. 2017.
arXiv: 1705.00652[cs.CL].