[Page 1]
Appl. Sci. 2024, 14, 9318. https://doi.org/10.3390/app14209318 www.mdpi.com/journal/applsci 
Article 
Evaluating Retrieval-Augmented Generation Models for  
Financial Report Question and Answering 
Ivan Iaroshev 1, Ramalingam Pillai 1, Leandro Vaglietti 1 and Thomas Hanne 2,* 
1 School of Business, University of Applied Sciences and Arts Northwestern Swi tzerland,  
4600 Olten, Switzerland 
2 Institute for Information System s, University of Applied Sciences and Arts Northwestern Switzerland,  
4600 Olten, Switzerland 
* Correspondence: thomas.hanne@ fhnw.ch; Tel.: +41-62-957-22-92 
Abstract: This study explores the application of retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) to improve 
the accuracy and reliability of large lang uage models (LLMs) in the context of ﬁnancial report 
analysis. The focus is on enabling private investor s to make informed decisions by enhancing the 
question-and-answering capabilities re garding the half-yearly or quarterly ﬁnancial reports of 
banks. The study adopts a Design Science Research (DSR) methodology to develop and evaluate an 
RAG system tailored for this use case. The study conducts a series of experiments to explore models 
in which di ﬀerent RAG components are used. The aim is  to enhance context relevance, answer 
faithfulness, and answer relevance. The results indicate that model one (OpenAI ADA and OpenAI 
GPT-4) achieved the highest performance, showin g robust accuracy and relevance in response. 
Model three (MiniLM Embedder and OpenAI GPT-4) scored signi ﬁcantly lower, indicating the 
importance of high-quality components. The evaluati on also revealed that well-structured reports 
result in better RAG performance than less coherent report s. Qualitative questions received higher 
scores than the quantitative ones, demonstrating the RAG’s proﬁciency in handling descriptive data. 
In conclusion, a tailored RAG can aid investors in  providing accurate and contextually relevant 
information from ﬁnancial reports, thereby enhancing decision making. 
Keywords: retrieval-augmented generation; large language models (LLMs); ﬁnancial reports; 
question and answering with LLM 
 
1. Introduction 
Since the inception of Arti ﬁcial Intelligence (AI), researchers have pursued the 
ambitious goal of developing ma chines capable of reading, writing, and conversing like 
humans. This occurred in the domain of natural language processing (NLP). According 
to Zhao et al. [1], NLP has a rich history: from the development of statistical language 
models (SLMs) to the rise of neural language models (NLMs), linguistic capabilities have 
signiﬁcantly increased, enabling AI system s to understand and generate complex 
language patterns [1]. 
In recent years, NLP has witnessed remark able progress with the introduction of 
large language models (LLMs). These models, which were extensively trained on vast 
amounts of textual data, demonstrated unprecedented proﬁciency in generating human-
like text and performing language-based tasks accurately [2]. However, despite their 
advancements, LLMs still face several limitati ons. Burtsev et al. [3] outline three main 
limitations of LLMs. First, they struggle with complex reasoning, hindering their ability 
to draw accurate conclusions. Second, their knowledge or expertise is limited to training 
data, which may lead to failure in providing relevant information. Third, they may 
produce inaccurate outputs due to a lack of understanding of prompts, which makes them 
marginally helpful. 
Citation: Iaroshev, I.; Pillai, R.; 
Vaglietti, L.; Hanne, T. Evaluating 
Retrieval-Augmented Generation 
Models for Financial Report  
Question and Answering. Appl. Sci. 
2024, 14, 9318. https://doi.org/ 
10.3390/app14209318 
Academic Editor: Pedro Couto 
Received: 16 September 2024 
Revised: 7 October 2024 
Accepted: 9 October 2024 
Published: 12 October 2024 
 
Copyright: © 2024 by the authors. 
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Swi tzerland. 
This article is an open access article 
distributed under the terms and 
conditions of the Creative Commons 
Attribution (CC BY) license 
(https://creativecommons.org/license
s/by/4.0/).


[Page 2]
Appl. Sci. 2024, 14, 9318 2 of 19 
 
The rise of LLMs has also sparked in terest in their application to speci ﬁc tasks, 
prompting the emergence of an approach call ed retrieval-augmented generation (RAG). 
This approach was ﬁrst introduced by Guu et al. [4] and Lewis et al. [5]. RAG was devised 
to extend the capabilities of LLMs beyond co nventional training data. By integrating a 
specialized body of knowledge, RAG enables LLMs to provide more accurate responses 
to user queries. In essence, RAG comprises two distinct phases: retrieval and generation. 
During the retrieval phase, de ﬁned sources (e.g., indexed documents) are analyzed to 
extract relevant information that is aligned with the user’s prompt or question. The 
retrieved information is then seamlessly integrated with the user’s prompt and forwarded 
to the language model. In the generative phase, the LLM leverages the augmented prompt 
and internal understanding to craft a tailored  response that addresses the user’s query 
eﬀectively [6,7]. 
RAG is gaining momentum for its potential to improve LLM-generated responses by 
grounding models on the said external so urces, thereby reducing issues such as 
inconsistency and hallucination [8,9]. 
1.1. Problem Statement 
The integration of RAG into LLMs has rapidly gained traction, and it has emerged as 
a key strategy to increase the practical applicability of LLMs [8]. However, despite its 
potential to reduce factual inaccuracies or “hallucinations”, there remains a notable gap 
in the literature regarding RAG’s application in question and answering for a speciﬁc use 
case: private investors seeking to analyze the ﬁnancial reports of banks e ﬀectively (see 
Section 2.4). The manual analysis of such reports is both time-consuming and labor-
intensive. However, by leveraging RAG, investors can access domain-speciﬁc information 
from half-yearly or quarterly reports previo usly published by several banks. Through 
RAG-facilitated question-and-answer sessions,  investors can make informed decisions 
based on accurate insights. 
This study focuses on half-yearly and quarterly reports due to their regular 
publication frequency, ensuring an ample number of samples for analysis. In addition, 
these reports contain a be tter-manageable number of pages than annual reports, which 
may overwhelm an RAG system with their ex tensive content. Further details about the 
data collection process are provided in Section 3.2. 
Currently, there is a lack of a straightforward RAG approach tailored to this use case, 
which hinders the empirical demons trations of how RAG can be e ﬀectively adapted 
(Section 2.3). These experiments with diﬀerent model conﬁgurations should focus on both 
the retrieval and generation components (Sec tion 2.2) to achieve desirable outcomes 
across evaluation aspects (context relevance,  answer faithfulness, and answer relevance, 
Section 2.3). 
Therefore, the motivation to research RAG encompasses several crucial aspects. First, 
it aims to enhance the quality of responses across evaluation dimensions such as context 
relevance, answer faithfulness, and answer relevance by exploring di ﬀerent model 
conﬁgurations (e.g., di ﬀerent LLMs enriched with the same data sources). Second, it 
attempts to address the persistent challenges encountered by state-of-the-art LLMs, such 
as factual inaccuracies and hallucinations. By examining the practical implementation and 
eﬀectiveness of RAG, particularly in speci ﬁc domains like ﬁnancial analysis for private 
investors, this research aims to provide va luable insights that bridge the gap between 
theoretical advancements and real-world applicability. 
1.2. Thesis Statement and Research Questions 
Our study aims to explore the potential of RAG for improving the accuracy and 
reliability of LLMs for analyzing half-yearly or quarterly reports. Through a range of 
experiments featuring various RAG model con ﬁgurations, such as di ﬀerent LLMs and 
retrieval methods, we aim to examine and gauge diﬀerences and improvements in context 
relevance, answer faithfulne ss, and answer relevance in ﬁnancial report analysis.


[Page 3]
Appl. Sci. 2024, 14, 9318 3 of 19 
 
Ultimately, the goal is to empower users to make informed decisions by providing 
accurate answers. To achieve this, a thesis statement and main research question were 
formulated, supplemented by additional sub-questions. 
Thesis Statement: The e ﬀectiveness of RAG in enhancing context relevance, answer 
faithfulness, and answer relevance for analyzing half-yearly or quarterly reports can be 
evaluated through empirical experiments with diﬀerent model conﬁgurations. 
Main Research Question: How can RAG be adapted to increase the context relevance, 
answer faithfulness, and answer relevance of LLM conclusions about several types of 
ﬁnancial reports? 
1. How can the retrieval component of RAG be set up to extract relevant information 
from half-yearly or quarterly reports? 
2. What strategies can be employed to ensu re that the generation component of RAG 
produces answers to the questions posed about half-yearly or quarterly reports? 
3. How can the eﬀectiveness of the RAG system for analyzing half-yearly or quarterly 
reports in the banking sector be reliably evaluated and validated? 
4. How accurately do RAG-generated respon ses represent the information extracted 
from the half-yearly or quarterly reports of banking institutions? 
2. Literature Review 
In this review, RAG systems, including evaluation metrics, methods, and 
frameworks, are brie ﬂy discussed. In addition, a research gap is identi ﬁed that requires 
further investigation. 
Methodologically, the literature review was initiated with extensive searches on 
Google Scholar using broad keywords such as “Retrieval Augmented Generation” and 
“RAG” to capture general papers on the topic. As the investigation progressed, the search 
terms were reﬁned to focus on speciﬁc aspects of RAG, including “Evaluation methods of 
RAG”. This approach includes both forwar d and backward searches to ensure the 
comprehensive coverage of the relevant literature. While priority was given to peer-
reviewed academic papers, a selection of non-peer-reviewed papers with substantial 
citations and reputable authors was also integrated, acknowledging the rapid 
advancements in LLM and RAG research. 
2.1. History and Current State of RAG 
The ﬁeld of NLP has seen signiﬁcant advancements with the emergence of LLMs like 
the GPT and LLama series, as well as models like Gemini [2,10,11]. Despite their successes, 
these models still need to cope with challenges such as outdated knowledge and a lack of 
domain-speciﬁc expertise [12,13]. One major issu e is the generation of incorrect 
information, known as “hallucinations”, especially when faced with queries beyond their 
training data [3,14]. These limitations highlight the need for additional safeguards before 
deploying LLMs in real-world settings [6]. 
A solution to address these challenges is  RAG, which integrates external data 
retrieval into the generative process. RAG, pioneered by Lewis et al. [5] and Guu et al. [4], 
revolutionizes generative tasks within the LLM domain. In RAG, LLMs initially query 
external data sources to gather relevant information before generating text or answering 
questions. This retrieval step ensures that the subsequent generation phase is grounded 
in the retrieved evidence, which signiﬁcantly improves the accuracy and relevance of the 
output [8,15]. 
By dynamically retrieving information from knowledge bases during inference, RAG 
eﬀectively tackles issues such as factual inaccuracies or “hallucinations” [9]. The adoption 
of RAG in LLMs has rapidly gained momentum, and it has become a central approach to 
enhance the capabilities of chatbots and make LLMs more suitable for practical 
applications [8].


[Page 4]
Appl. Sci. 2024, 14, 9318 4 of 19 
 
2.2. Evaluating Targets of RAG 
Despite the proven e ﬀectiveness of RAG as outlined in  Section 2.1, their successful 
implementation still requires careful tuning. Various factors, including the retrieval 
model, construction of the external knowle dge base, and language model complexities, 
collectively inﬂuence the overall performance of the RAG system. Therefore, the evalua-
tion of RAG systems is critical [16]. However, before proceeding with evaluation, it is im-
portant to deﬁne evaluation targets. 
The workﬂow of a traditional RAG typically comprises three key steps according to 
Gao et al. [6]: indexing, retrieval, and generation. Indexing involves extracting raw data 
from various formats, converting the data to plain text, segmenting the data into smaller 
chunks, and encoding these chunks into vector representations. Vector representations are 
the numerical representations of data, such as words or documents, that are used to cap-
ture semantic meaning and enable computational operations. During retrieval, user que-
ries are transformed similarly into vector representations using the same encoding model 
applied during indexing. The query vectors are then compared with the vector represen-
tations of the indexed chunks to compute simi larity scores. The chunks with the highest 
similarity scores are retrieved and serve as the expanded context for generating responses. 
In the generation phase, the query and select ed chunks are synthesized as a prompt for 
an LLM to formulate a response. This proce ss allows the model to leverage the encoded 
representations of the input data to generate contextually relevant and coherent responses 
[6]. 
Let us note that there are slightly di ﬀerent approaches for RAG conceptualizations 
such as in IBM Research [7] where only the two phases retrieval and content generation 
are distinguished. However, both approaches agree that evaluation should ensure a com-
prehensive assessment of both the quality of  the retrieved context and the coherence of 
the generated content. The retrieval quality assesses the eﬀectiveness of the sourced con-
text, while the generation quality evaluates the relevance and coherence of the responses 
[7]. 
2.3. Evaluation Aspects of RAG 
In the evaluation of RAG models, there are three primary quality metrics to assess 
the two main targets retrieval and generation. These quality metrics, including context 
relevance (retrieval metric), answer faithfulness (generation metric), and answer relevance 
(generation metric), serve to gauge the eﬀectiveness of the RAG system [17,18]. 
Context relevance scrutinizes the precision and speci ﬁcity of the retrieved context, 
ensuring relevance while minimizing the processing costs associated with irrelevant con-
tent. Answer faithfulness ensures the ﬁdelity of the generated responses to the retrieved 
context, thereby maintaining consistency and avoiding contradictions and “hallucina-
tions”. Answer relevance requires that the generated responses directly address the posed 
questions, eﬀectively tackling the main inquiry [17,18]. 
RAG evaluation methods can be categorized into two types: reference-required and 
reference-free evaluation. In the reference-fr ee approach, the quality of outputs is deter-
mined based on intrinsic text characteristics, bypassing the need for human-annotated 
ground truth labels in the ev aluation dataset. Conversely, the reference-required ap-
proach compares outputs to a ground truth annotated by humans [16]. 
Reference-free evaluation frameworks leverage LLMs to assess quality scores, such 
as context relevance, answer faithfulness, and answer relevance, by analyzing the align-
ment of the generated text with the retrieved context. However, this method’s reliability 
can be compromised if the retrieved external information is of low quality [16]. Frame-
works such as RAGAS (Retrieval-Augmented Generation Assessment) by Es et al. [17,19], 
ARES (Automated RAG Evaluation System) by Saad-Falcon et al. [18], or RAG Triad by 
TruLens [20] are classi ﬁed as reference-free frameworks according to [16]. Nonetheless, 
both RAGAS and ARES require a form of “g round truth” for evaluation besides using


[Page 5]
Appl. Sci. 2024, 14, 9318 5 of 19 
 
synthetic training data for as sessing the quality of individual RAG components. Let us 
note that various other approaches related to reference-free evaluation methods are avail-
able [21–25], which, for instance, may require the manual evaluation of RAG’s output. 
In contrast to reference-free evaluation methods, reference-required benchmarks in-
volve comparing outputs to a reference or ground truth annotated by humans. These 
benchmarks provide quantitative metrics to measure the performance of the RAG model 
and deepen the understanding of its capabili ties across various evaluation aspects. For 
instance, the Retrieval-Augmented Generation Benchmark (RGB) [8] evaluates four essen-
tial abilities for RAG: noise robustness, negative rejection, information integration, and 
counterfactual robustness. However, this a pproach focuses on qu estion-and-answering 
tasks to measure RAG performance. Other approaches, such as those discussed by Lyu et 
al. [16], support a wider range of RAG applications but are more challenging to imple-
ment. 
2.4. RAG as an Approach to Financial Report Question and Answering 
RAG ﬁnds application in scenarios centered around evaluating the question and an-
swering of ﬁnancial reports, oﬀering access to a wealth of freely available domain-speciﬁc 
information, such as reports of banks. However, there is limited literature on this topic. 
One approach targets ﬁnancial analysts: Sarmah et al. [26] demonstrated the use of 
LLMs to e ﬃciently extract information from earnin gs report transcripts while ensuring 
high accuracy. Combining the retrieval-augmented generation technique with metadata, 
they streamline the extraction process and mitigate hallucination. Their evaluation, based 
on various objective metrics for Q&A systems, demonstrated the superiority of their 
method. However, they focus on earnings call  transcripts. Additionally, their approach 
incorporates manual labeling to evaluate the answer quality. Therefore, their evaluation 
methodology focuses on reference-required evaluation (as discussed in Section 2.3). 
Two other papers explore very speciﬁc and narrow aspects of RAG in ﬁnancial con-
texts. Yepes et al. [27] focused on e ﬀective chunking in RAG and proposed an enhanced 
approach to chunk ﬁnancial reports by identifying structural elements in such documents. 
The proposed method optimizes the chunk size without tuning and improves context and 
accuracy. 
Another important angle is ﬁnancial sentiment analysis, which is crucial for valua-
tion and investment decision making. Zhang et al. [28] introduced a retrieval-augmented 
LLM framework for this purpose, which features an instruction-tuned LLM module. This 
module uses pretrained LLMs with human-like text to guide the model’s execution based 
on task descriptions and desired outputs, which are often labeled by humans. In addition, 
a retrieval-augmentation module gathers context from reliable external sources. However, 
this approach focuses on sentiment analysis rather than Q&A from ﬁnancial reports. 
2.5. Research Gap 
In Sections 2.1–2.5, RAG applications were discussed that can e ﬀectively tackle the 
challenges of LLMs, such as inaccuracies and hallucinations. However, there is a signi ﬁ-
cant lack of empirical knowledge and litera ture on optimizing RAG systems and their 
retrieval and generation components for ﬁnancial report question and answering. Specif-
ically, there is insuﬃcient empirical evidence on the quality of RAG systems developed to 
handle complex ﬁnancial data, such as quarterly and half-yearly bank reports. 
Although automatic evaluation methods like RAGAS, as well as manual evaluation 
methods, exist to assess RAG systems without heavily relying on ground truths, there is 
limited literature on evaluating RAG systems speciﬁcally for bank reports. These reports 
pose unique challenges, such as accurately interpreting ﬁnancial data, understanding reg-
ulatory compliance, and assessing business performance metrics. Therefore, evaluating 
RAG systems and their components in such sc enarios to ensure minimal deviations in 
interpretation requires a thorough examinat ion of the retrieval and generation compo-
nents.


[Page 6]
Appl. Sci. 2024, 14, 9318 6 of 19 
 
3. Research Design 
This section presents the research method ology used to address the research ques-
tions outlined in Section 1.2 and delineates the data sources and collection methods em-
ployed. 
The research tackles a real-world challenge by developing a novel and innovative 
artifact. Hence, Design Science Research (DSR), as proposed by Hevner and Cha tterjee 
[29], is recommended. DSR involves the creation and evaluation of an artifact. In this con-
text, it entails the establishment of an RAG system, along with the adaptation of its com-
ponents, such as the embedding model or LLM. These adaptations will be tailored to var-
ying model con ﬁgurations, which will be evaluated. Th is application aims to tackle an 
important problem by addressing the lack of a straightforward RAG approach tailored for 
the use case of private investors analyzing half-yearly or quarterly bank reports. 
3.1. Process Steps of Design Science Research 
This research adheres to the 5-step approach of DSR as proposed by Hevner and 
Chatterjee [29]. The ﬁrst step, Awareness, involves identifying the research problem and 
requirements. Subsequently, the second and third steps, Suggestion and Development, 
involve designing an artifact that addresses the identiﬁed problems. Following the design 
phase, the fourth step, Evaluation, assesses the e ﬀectiveness and functionality of the de-
veloped artifact. Finally, the ﬁfth step, Conclusion, summarizes by synthesizing the ﬁnd-
ings and drawing conclusions. 
Most steps of the DSR approach focus on a speci ﬁc research question and its corre-
sponding objective. This will be outlined in the following subsections. 
3.1.1. Awareness of Problem and Identiﬁcation of Requirements 
In the initial step of the 5-step DSR approach proposed by Hevner and Cha tterjee 
[29], the focus is on recognizing a problem that can be addressed through new artifacts. 
This step corresponds with the problem statem ent outlined in Section 1.1, the literature 
review in Section 2, and the research gap identi ﬁed in Section 2.5. In short, the problem 
statement and research gap illustrate the limited exploration of RAG for assisting private 
investors in analyzing the ﬁnancial reports of banks. Despite these potential beneﬁts, tai-
lored RAG approaches for this speci ﬁc case are lacking. This gap hinders the empirical 
demonstration of RAG’s e ﬀectiveness in providing accurate insights for investors. The 
motivation behind this research is to develop and test RAG implementations tailored to 
the analysis of the half-yearly and quarterly reports of banks with the aim of enhancing 
response quality, addressing challenges in dialog models, and contributing to advancing 
RAG applications in this domain. 
3.1.2. Suggestion 
The second step of DSR involves determining the type of artifact that could solve the 
current problem [29]. In this case, the proposed artifact is an RAG system and its corre-
sponding implementation. This RAG system should be designed to facilitate the analysis 
of the half-yearly and quarterly reports of bank s. It is essential to note that the RAG sys-
tem, respectively, the retrieval and generation components, should be able to encompass 
various scenarios, thereby allowing for comprehensive evaluation and adaptation as 
needed.


[Page 7]
Appl. Sci. 2024, 14, 9318 7 of 19 
 
3.1.3. Development 
After deﬁning the problem and identifying the artifact type, as per Hevner and Chat-
terjee [29], the Development phase should concentrate on designing and creating an arti-
fact that o ﬀers a solution to the de ﬁned problem. The sub-questions one and two (see 
Table 1), outlined in Section 1.2., are integral to this phase. 
Table 1. Sub-questions for the Development phase. 
No. Sub-Questions Activities 
1. 
How can the retrieval component of RAG 
be set up to extract relevant information 
from half-yearly or quarterly reports? 
Data collection through literature re-
view 
Artifact development 
2. 
What strategies can be employed to ensure 
that the generation component of RAG pro-
duces answers to questions posed about 
half-yearly or quarterly reports? 
Data collection through literature re-
view 
Artifact development 
In this phase, the focus is on developin g and implementing an RAG system. Estab-
lishing an RAG system requires the deﬁnition and selection of certain components. Figure 
1 shows the simpliﬁed architecture. 
 
Figure 1. RAG system according to [6]. 
The ﬂow is outlined based on the following 9 steps (identiﬁed by the circled number 
in Figure 1) based on [6]: 
1. Begin by gathering essential reports for the RAG system’s operation, speciﬁcally tar-
geting half-yearly and quarterly reports from banks. Further insights into the data 
collection procedures are provided in Section 3.2. 
2. Break down the collected data into manageable chunks to streamline information re-
trieval and improve eﬃciency by avoiding the processing of entire documents. This 
segmentation ensures that each data chunk remains focused on a speciﬁc topic, which 
increases the likelihood of retrieving relevant information for user queries. Subse-
quently, these segmented data are transformed into vector representations known as 
embeddings, which capture the semantic essence of the text. 
3. The resulting embeddings are stored in a dedic ated vector database to facilitate the 
eﬃcient retrieval of pertinent information, transcending traditional word-to-word 
comparison methods.


[Page 8]
Appl. Sci. 2024, 14, 9318 8 of 19 
 
4. The user query formulation is initiated. 
5. Upon entry into the system, the user query is converted to an embedding or vector 
representation. To ensure consistency, th e same model is used for both document 
and query embeddings. 
6. Use the transformed query to search the vector database and perform comparisons 
with document embeddings. 
7. The most relevant text chunks are retrie ved, and a contextual framework is estab-
lished to address the user query. 
8. The retrieved text chunks are integrated with the original user query to provide a 
uniﬁed prompt for LLM. 
9. The uniﬁed prompt, which comprises the retrieved text chunks and the original user 
query, is sent to the LLM. The LLM utilizes its advanced natural language processing 
capabilities and extensive knowledge to generate coherent responses tailored to ad-
dress the user’s queries eﬀectively, leveraging the additional context provided by the 
text chunks to enhance the accuracy and depth of the responses. 
Therefore, for the development of a newl y built RAG system, the essential compo-
nents include an embedding model, a vector database, an LLM, and a comprehensive or-
chestration tool to manage the entire system seamlessly. The following tools were identi-
ﬁed as potential setups: 
• Embedding Model: MiniLMEmbedder [30] and BedRockEmbeddings [31]; 
• Vector Database: FAISS [32] and Chroma [33]; 
• LLM: GPT-4o [34], Llama 3 [35], and Gemini 1.5 Pro [36]; 
• Orchestrator: LangChain [37] and LlamaIndex [38]. 
Furthermore, there exists an alternative approach involving the use of a pre-built 
RAG system that can be readily deployed. One such system is the Verba RAG by Weaviate. 
In this case, it is also possible to create di ﬀerent model conﬁgurations by using diﬀerent 
embedding models (e.g., OpenAI ADA, MiniLMEmbedder) and LLMs (e.g., GPT-4o, 
Gemini 1.5 Pro) [39,40]. 
In any case, it is the goal to create three distinct technical model conﬁgurations, each 
using diﬀerent components. For each model con ﬁguration, a selection of quarterly and 
half-yearly reports is gathered from various banks, as detailed in Section 3.2. Using these 
documents, querying and answering via the RAG system will be conducted. Ten questions 
per bank are formulated for this purpose and tested with each model conﬁguration. 
3.1.4. Feedback and Evaluation 
In the fourth step of the DSR approach, the focus shifts to evaluating whether the 
artifact eﬀectively addresses the identiﬁed problem and assessing its strengths and weak-
nesses [29]. In this context, th e sub-questions 3 and 4 from Se ction 1.2. are relevant (see 
Table 2). 
Table 2. Sub-questions for the Feedback and Evaluation phase. 
No. Sub-Questions Activities 
3. 
How can the effectiveness of the RAG system 
for analyzing half-yearly or quarterly reports 
in the banking sector be reliably evaluated 
and validated? 
The designing, conduction, and 
evaluation of tests 
4. 
How accurately do RAG-generated responses 
represent the information extracted from half-
yearly or quarterly reports of banking institu-
tions?  
The designing, conduction, and 
evaluation of tests 
The evaluation (sub-question 3 and 4) is crucial for determining the viability of an 
artifact in practical application scenarios, as it provides insights into the quality of the


[Page 9]
Appl. Sci. 2024, 14, 9318 9 of 19 
 
RAG system’s performance. Three model conﬁgurations are generated for the subsequent 
evaluation. The evaluation of the answers provided by the RAG system encompasses con-
text relevance, answer faithfulness, and answer relevance, as discussed in Section 2.3. 
Given the considered use case, practical and accessible evaluation methods are 
needed that do not require extensive technical expertise. Due to the project’s timeline and 
scope, we will set up an evaluation manually. 
3.1.5. Conclusion 
In the ﬁnal step of the DSR process, the focus is on discussing the ﬁndings and eval-
uating their generalizability, as well as considering future aspects, such as open questions 
and plans for further development [29]. 
Thus, the aim is to illuminate the potential of the speci ﬁc RAG system for broader 
implementation, identify avenues for continued development and enhancement, and ad-
dress any open questions regarding its functionality, model conﬁguration, output, or eval-
uation. 
3.2. Data Collection and Analysis 
This section discusses the necessary activi ties and the chosen data collection ap-
proach. As mentioned in Section 1.1, the half -yearly and quarterly reports of banks were 
used to evaluate the RAG system in combination with qualitative methods like document 
reviews by directly checking the considered quarterly and half-yearly reports. The report-
ing periods include the ﬁrst quarters of 2022 and 2023 and the interim reports of the ﬁrst 
half of 2022 and 2023. These periods were ch osen because the data in these reports are 
suﬃciently up-to-date. Another reason for the re port’s types of choice is that we would 
like to conduct and assess RAG performance under diﬀerent conditions. Thus, the ﬁnan-
cial situation of each bank is represented by two half-yearly reports from 2022 and 2023 
and two quarterly reports from the aforementioned years. 
The chosen sample banks include Barclays, HSBC, Credit Suisse, Credit Agricole, and 
Banco Santander. The reasons for choosing these banks are diverse. First, we need to ob-
tain direct access to their reports of the considered periods, which are published oﬃcially 
and are wri tten in English. Second, the sample banks are from European countries with 
local economic features: the UK, EU (France, Austria, Spain, and Czech Republic), and 
Switzerland. It is well known that the British economic system is quite di ﬀerent from the 
EU’s because of the domination of English law, which establishes other rules on property, 
trade, etc. At the same time, these three economic systems are not too far from each other 
unlike the US and China, which have varying standards of ﬁnancial reporting. However, 
three additional banks (Bawag Bank, Erste Bank & Sparkasse, and KB Bank) were chosen. 
These extra documents are not relevant to the experiments; however, they test the RAG 
system’s ability to ﬁlter out irrelevant data and focus on important information. 
4. Solution Development 
The following sections provide the research ﬁndings according to the main Design 
Science Research phases of Hevner and Chatterjee [29]. 
4.1. Suggestion Phase: Verba RAG 
For the development of an RAG system and to address the identi ﬁed problems (as 
stated in Section 4.1), Verba was used. Verba is an open-source RAG application that lev-
erages Weaviate, a vector database, for information retrieval. Using the Weaviate Cloud 
Service (WCS), one can easily implemen t Verba RAG without extensive technical 
knowledge [39].


[Page 10]
Appl. Sci. 2024, 14, 9318 10 of 19 
 
4.1.1. Verba RAG Architecture 
Verba’s modular architecture enables the customization of various components (see 
Table 3), such as readers, chunkers, embedders, retrievers, and generators [39], as illus-
trated in Figure 2. 
Table 3. Verba RAG architecture. 
Name Task 
Read-Chunk 
Manager  
The component (https://weaviate.io/blog/verba-open-source-rag-
app#chunker-manager-breaking-data-up, accessed on 10 June 2024) re-
ceives a list of strings representing uploaded documents. In our case, it 
handles the reports collected from various banks. The Read-Chunk Man-
ager takes a list of documents and breaks each document’s text into 
smaller segments. For this use case, the Read-Chunk Manager divides 
each document into chunks of 100-word tokens with a 50-token overlap. 
This method will remain consistent across all the tests. This approach is 
based on preliminary testing, which clearly indicated that larger chunk 
sizes (e.g., 250- and 400-word tokens) negatively affected the quality of 
the final output of the proposed RAG system when applied to the finan-
cial reports.  
Embedding 
Manager 
The Embedding Manager (https://weaviate.io/blog/verba-open-source-
rag-app#embedding-manager-vectorizing-data, accessed on 10 June 2024) 
receives a list of documents and embeds them as vectors into Weaviate as 
the relevant database. It is also used to retrieve chunks and documents 
from Weaviate. The specific embedding model used will vary according 
to the model configuration described in Section 4.2.1. 
Retrieve Man-
ager 
The Retrieve Manager (https://weaviate.io/blog/verba-open-source-rag-
app#retrieve-manager-finding-the-context, accessed on 10 June 2024) 
communicates with the Embedding Manager to retrieve chunks and ap-
ply custom logic. They return a list of chunks. For this use case, the “Win-
dowRetriever” is employed for all the tests, which retrieves relevant 
chunks and their surrounding context using a combination of semantic 
and keyword search (hybrid approach). 
Generation 
Manager 
The Generation Manager (https://weaviate.io/blog/verba-open-source-
rag-app#generation-manager-writing-the-answer, accessed on 10 June 
2024) uses a list of chunks and a query to generate an answer. Then, it re-
turns a string as the answer. Like the Embedding Manager, the specific 
generating model used will vary according to the model configuration 
described in Section 4.2.1.


[Page 11]
Appl. Sci. 2024, 14, 9318 11 of 19 
 
 
Figure 2. Illustration of the Verba RAG architecture based on [39]. 
4.1.2. Verba Flow 
Verba by Weaviate [39] is designed to be customizable and scalable. The ﬂow of this 
RAG system is generally the same as described in Section 3.1.3: Users can upload or im-
port data ﬁles via the Verba web interface. Once uploaded, Verba automatically chunks 
the documents and stores the embeddings in  the WCS Weaviate instance. When a query 
is entered into the Verba web interface, relevant document chunks are retrieved from the 
WCS Weaviate instance based on the selected query embeddings. These retrieved chunks 
are then passed to a language model (e.g., GPT-4o) to generate a contextual answer. Verba 
displays the generated answer along with the relevant document chunks used for context. 
4.2. Development Phase: Experiments with Verba RAG 
As detailed in Section 3.1.2, the artifact for this project involves the construction of an 
RAG pipeline with Verba by Weaviate and various other components. To address research 
questions one and two of Section 1.2, the RAG system will be developed, and three model 
conﬁgurations will be created, each using diﬀerent components. The setup and design of 
the experiments are outlined in the following sections. 
4.2.1. Model Conﬁgurations 
Three model conﬁgurations with diﬀerent components were developed for the eval-
uation of the RAG system, as shown in Table 4. 
Table 4. Model conﬁgurations. 
Model 
Embedding 
Model (Part of 
“Retrieval”) 
LLM (Part of 
“Generation”) Purpose 
Baseline 
Model OpenAI ADA OpenAI  
GPT-4o 
Establish a benchmark for performance 
based on widely used, reliable compo-
nents. 
Second 
Model 
OpenAI ADA 
(consistent with 
baseline) 
Google Gemini 
1.5 Pro 
Evaluate the impact of substituting the 
LLM (generator component) with a 
newly released LLM
 1 while keeping the


[Page 12]
Appl. Sci. 2024, 14, 9318 12 of 19 
 
embedding model constant to isolate the 
effect. 
Third 
Model 
MiniLM 
Embedder 
OpenAI GPT-4o 
(consistent with 
baseline) 
Assess the effect on the overall perfor-
mance of changing the embedding 
model (part of the retrieval component) 
to an open-source component while us-
ing the same LLM. 
1 according to the oﬃcial website of OpenAI [41], GPT-4o was launched on 13 May 2024, whereas 
Google [42,43] released Gemini 1.5 Pro on 9 April 2024 to the public and upgraded it on May 14, 
2024. The latest models are used. 
4.2.2. Data 
For each model con ﬁguration, two quarterly and two half-yearly reports from the 
ﬁve selected banks are used, as described in Section 3.2. To introduce complexity and sim-
ulate real-world challenges, reports from three additional banks are included. 
4.2.3. Questions 
Each bank will be subjected to ten speciﬁc questions and three model conﬁgurations. 
Seven of these questions are general, applicable across all the banks, and designed to eval-
uate the system’s general capabilities. These general questions are a mix of quantitative 
(e.g., ﬁnancial metrics like revenue or proﬁt) and qualitative types (e.g., risks, challenges, 
and trends), but all are questions that a private investor could ask. They were developed 
iteratively, starting with simple queries and reﬁning them through experiments to deter-
mine the optimal length and style. We ended up with relatively long questions that ac-
commodate di ﬀerent wordings, such as revenue, total income, and gross earnings, as 
banks often use these terms synonymously. These questions can be found in Appendix A. 
The remaining three questions are tailored to each individual bank to assess the sys-
tem’s ability to handle speciﬁc and detailed inquiries. 
4.2.4. Experiments 
The experiments were conducted by provid ing the RAG system with ten questions 
for each bank and model con ﬁguration. To ensure precise analysis and response, these 
questions were submi tted individually in a single session rather than in batches. Each 
question, answer, and the retrieved context were compiled into an Excel. The complete 
ﬁle includes data for ﬁve banks for three model con ﬁgurations with ten questions per 
model conﬁguration. 
The RAG system was set up according to the identi ﬁed requirements, developing 
three distinct model con ﬁgurations with di ﬀerent components. This setup addresses re-
search questions 1 and 2 from Section 1.2, particularly de ﬁning the retrieval and genera-
tion components. On the other hand, the deﬁned and developed setup of the RAG system 
and the experiments form the basis for answering research questions three and four. 
5. Evaluation and Discussion of Results 
This section outlines how the evaluation of the experiments was conducted. The re-
sults of the evaluation are then discussed. This section addresses research questions 3 and 
4 of Section 1.2. There is also a discussion of the academic relevance of this study at the 
end of this section. 
5.1. Realization of Evaluation 
To evaluate the three model conﬁgurations and assess the RAG systems, three quality 
metrics were used: context relevance (retrieval metric), answer faithfulness (generation 
metric), and answer relevance (generation metric) (described in Section 2.3).


[Page 13]
Appl. Sci. 2024, 14, 9318 13 of 19 
 
Each quality metric is evaluated manually for each response, corresponding to a spe-
ciﬁc question for a bank and model conﬁguration (as outlined in Section 3.1.3). Each metric 
is rated on a scale from 1 to 5 speciﬁcally developed for this purpose (see Table 5). 
Table 5. Scale for evaluation. 
Scale Definition 
1 The retrieved context is irrelevant to the question, the generated response is 
inaccurate and inconsistent, and it fails to address the question. 
2 
The retrieved context has limited relevance and contains several inaccuracies, 
the generated response exhibits notable inconsistencies, and it only partially 
addresses the given question. 
3 
The retrieved context is somewhat relevant but has some inaccuracies, the 
generated response is generally consistent with minor errors, and it ade-
quately addresses the question. 
4 The retrieved context is relevant and mostly accurate, the generated response 
is consistent with minor or no errors, and it effectively addresses the question. 
5 
The retrieved context is highly relevant and accurate, the generated response 
is entirely faithful to the context with no errors, and it thoroughly addresses 
the question. 
A total of 750 points are possible for each model conﬁguration, as there are ﬁve banks 
with 10 questions for each model, with ﬁve points possible per question in three diﬀerent 
categories. The maximum number of points per model con ﬁguration is calculated as fol-
lows: 5 × 10 × 5 × 3 = 750 points. 
5.2. Main Results and Discussion 
The primary outcome is the evaluation of the three model con ﬁgurations (see Table 
6). Our initial goal was to determine which model con ﬁguration performed best and to 
address research questions 3 and 4 from Section 1.2. 
Table 6. Evaluation results: three model conﬁgurations (best results are indicated in bold). 
No.  Embedding 
Model  LLM  Points 
Metric 1: 
Context 
Relevance 
Metric 2: 
Answer 
Faithful-
ness  
Metric 3: 
Answer 
Relevance 
Total 
1 OpenAI ADA OpenAI 
GPT-4o  
Total 
Points 175 189 188 552 
Average 
Points 3.5 3.78 3.76 3.68 
2 
OpenAI ADA 
(consistent 
with baseline) 
Google Gem-
ini 1.5 Pro  
Total 
Points 176 185 182 543 
Average 
Points 3.52 3.7 3.64 3.62 
3 MiniLM 
Embedder  
OpenAI 
GPT-4o (con-
sistent with 
baseline)  
Total 
Points 137 155 146 438 
Average 
Points 2.74 3.1 2.92 2.92 
Model one (OpenAI ADA and OpenAI GPT-4o) achieved the highest overall score 
(552 of 750 points). With an average score of 3.7 out of 5, this model con ﬁguration falls 
between the 3- and 4-point de ﬁnitions on the scale presented in Section 5.1. Thus, the


[Page 14]
Appl. Sci. 2024, 14, 9318 14 of 19 
 
retrieved context was generally relevant and mostly accurate, and the generated responses 
were consistent with minor errors to address the posed questions. The lowest scores were 
assigned to “Context Relevance”, often due to retrieving over 10–15 chunks, many of 
which were not pertinent. However, even with irrelevant chunks, the LLM still provided 
mostly accurate answers. This highlights GPT-4o’s robustness in handling excess infor-
mation. 
Model two (OpenAI ADA and Gemini 1.5 Pro) received a slightly lower overall score. 
The “Context Relevance” score remained nearly stable due to using the same embedding 
model. However, the scores for “ Answer Fa ithfulness” and “ Answer Relevance” were 
slightly lower, reﬂecting the impact of using a diﬀerent LLM. This observation aligns with 
benchmarks from the LLM Leaderboard of the Large Model Systems Organization [44], 
where GPT-4o was rated with 1287 points compared to Gemini 1.5 Pro with 1266 points. 
In addition, the Massive Multitask Language Understanding (MMLU) benchmark devel-
oped by Hendrycks et al. [45] obtained a score of 88.7% for GPT-4o and 81.9% for Gemini 
1.5 Pro [46]. These benchmarks indicate a slight performance edge for GPT-4o, which was 
reﬂected in the evaluation results. 
Model three (MiniLM Embedder and OpenAI GPT-4) demonstrated a signi ﬁcantly 
lower overall score of 438 points, which was more than 20% lower than model one and 
lower than model two. Changing the embedding model from OpenAI’s ADA to the 
MiniLM Embedder resulted in lower scores for all the metrics, which is not unexpected as 
the new model is much smaller than ADA. The “Context Relevance” score was consider-
ably lower because much of the retrieved context was not relevant to the posed questions. 
We observed that this model conﬁguration often retrieved fewer chunks than the previous 
models, which also aﬀected “ Answer Faithfulness” and “ Answer Relevance”. Without suf-
ﬁcient (quantity) and relevant (quality) contex t, the LLM struggled to  generate accurate 
answers. This underscores the importance of using a high-quality embedding model to 
retrieve relevant information. 
In summary, to answer research questions three and four from Section 1.2, models 
one and two demonstrated a more accurate re presentation of the necessary information, 
while model three lagged behind. The ev aluation approach and setup were e ﬀective for 
reliably evaluating and validating these experiments. 
5.3. Additional Results and Discussion 
Table 7 presents the evaluation results for each bank, independent of the model con-
ﬁguration. The main di ﬀerence was observed between Barclays (290 of 450 points) and 
HSBC (338 of 450 points). Barclays, with an average score of 3.2, had a notably low score 
for “Context Relevance”. A comparison of the half-yearly and quarterly reports of Bar-
clays and HSBC reveals that they use completely diﬀerent layouts. Barclays reports are in 
landscape mode and contain a large amount of data displayed in tables and various types 
of charts (e.g., line charts and bar charts) with minimal wri tten text. On the contrary, 
HSBC’s reports are text-heavy with well-explained tables and minimal charts. This layout 
makes it easier for retrievers to gather the relevant context. Consequently, the HSBC re-
ports are more suitable for the RAG system. 
Table 7. Results of evaluation—total points per bank (best results are indicated in bold). 
Bank Metric 1: Con-
text Relevance  
Metric 2: An-
swer Faithful-
ness  
Metric 3: An-
swer Relevance Total  
Banco Santander 96.0 97.0 99.0 292.0 
CS 104.0 97.0 97.0 298.0 
Barclays 81.0 107.0 102.0 290.0 
Credit Agricole 106.0 107.0 102.0 315.0 
HSBC 101.0 121.0 116.0 338.0


[Page 15]
Appl. Sci. 2024, 14, 9318 15 of 19 
 
Table 8 presents the results for each of the seven standards and three individual ques-
tions. The highest scores were obtained on individual questions. This indicates that when 
speciﬁc questions and wording align with the report, the RAG system performs well 
across all three metrics, thereby providing accurate answers. 
Table 8. Results of evaluation—total points per question (best results are indicated in bold). 
Questions Metric 1: Con-
text Relevance 
Metric 2: An-
swer Faithful-
ness  
Metric 3: An-
swer Rele-
vance 
Total  
Indiv. Question 1 57 58 59 174 
Indiv. Question 2 54 59 58 171 
Indiv. Question 3 63 63 62 188 
Standard Question 1 
(quantitative) 42 56 51 149 
Standard Question 2 
(quantitative) 45 49 45 139 
Standard Question 3 
(quantitative) 45 46 45 136 
Standard Question 4 
(quantitative) 42 46 44 132 
Standard Question 5 
(qualitative) 43 46 46 135 
Standard Question 6 
(qualitative) 47 54 53 154 
Standard Question 7 
(qualitative) 50 52 53 155 
The qualitative questions also received high er average scores than the quantitative 
questions. It was found that when multiple similar numbers appeared in a report, the 
RAG sometimes had diﬃculties handling them accurately. For example, question 4 asked 
for the total assets held by the bank at the end of H1 2023. Banks typically report various 
types of assets, such as risk-weighted assets, customer assets, or high-quality liquid assets. 
If the RAG system selected the wrong number, it received a low score. However, minimal 
hallucination was observed; instead, the primary issue was selecting an incorrect but ac-
tually appearing number. On the other hand, for qualitative questions such as market 
trends, the RAG system often produced at least a partially correct answer, which resulted 
in higher scores. 
5.4. Academic Relevance of Artifact Evaluation 
The evaluation highlights the academic signi ﬁcance of the RAG system in assisting 
private investors with bank ﬁnancial report analysis (see Section 2.4). By leveraging RAG, 
investors can access domain-speci ﬁc information from half-yea rly or quarterly reports. 
Among the evaluated model conﬁgurations, model one was the top performer, delivering 
accurate answers with minor errors. However, due to the variability in performance, the 
importance of selecting reliable system components was underscored. 
This study shows the critical role of well-structured ﬁnancial reports, as poorly orga-
nized documents, such as those from Barclays, received lower scores. This highlights the 
necessity for clear and coherent ﬁnancial documentation. In addition, this study identiﬁes 
the types of questions that the RAG system handles most proﬁciently, providing valuable 
academic insights. 
Importantly, the evaluation has shown that the RAG concept addresses challenges in 
LLMs, particularly issues related to factual accuracy and the avoidance of hallucinations.


[Page 16]
Appl. Sci. 2024, 14, 9318 16 of 19 
 
These ﬁndings underscore the crucial importance of this research area for both academic 
inquiry and practical applications in ﬁnancial report analysis. 
6. Conclusions 
This section consolidates our research ﬁndings, assesses the success of addressing the 
main research question, and presents the key insights gained from the study. Practical 
implications, limitations, and the potential future developments of the suggested artifact 
are discussed. 
The study focused on the main research question: “How can the RAG be adapted to 
increase the context relevance, answer fait hfulness, and answer relevance of LLM’s con-
clusions about several types of ﬁnancial reports?”. By developing an RAG system and 
exploring three technical RAG model con ﬁgurations employing di ﬀerent components 
(embedding models and LLMs), variations in these metrics were identiﬁed. The develop-
ment and evaluation process led us to conclude that the ﬁrst model con ﬁguration was 
particularly eﬀective. Ultimately, the ﬁndings suggest that we can empower private in-
vestors to make informed decisions when provided with accurate answers derived by 
such an RAG system from relevant bank reports. 
Although the main research question was addressed successfully, the study revealed 
several areas for improvement. A signiﬁcant limitation was the RAG system’s diﬃculty in 
processing complex PDF layouts. Future resear ch should aim to optimize the system by 
integrating more robust components, such as computer vision models, to handle visual 
information more eﬀectively. Moreover, adding a domain-speciﬁc repository for ﬁnancial 
terminology would enhance context understanding and mitigate issues arising from dif-
ferent terminology used by diﬀerent banks for similar concepts (e.g., assets). 
Future research holds various promising avenues to provide investors with even 
more reliable insights. Expanding the system to include a broader spectrum of banks is a 
critical aspect. In addition, exploring more advanced evaluation methods could enhance 
the robustness and accuracy of the assessment process, thereby improving RAG’s overall 
eﬃcacy. 
By addressing these limitations and explor ing the outlined research directions, the 
RAG systems’ capability to analyze ﬁnancial reports and deliver valuable insights to pri-
vate investors could be enhanced. 
Author Contributions: Methodology, software, investigation, and writing—original draft prepara-
tion, I.I., R.P., and L.V.; writing—review and edit ing and supervision, T.H. All authors have read 
and agreed to the published version of the manuscript. 
Funding: This research received no external funding. 
Data Availability Statement: The data presented in this study ar e available upon request from the 
corresponding author due to legal reasons. 
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂicts of interest. 
Appendix A 
Table A1. Questions for Experiments. 
No. Question/Prompt Period Type 
1. 
What was the total revenue for [Bank Name] in quarter Q1 
2022? Retrieve the total revenue for [Bank Name] from the re-
port of the quarter Q1 2022. Also, consider alternative terms 
such as ‘total income’ or ‘gross earnings’ if they are used in 
the document. 
Quarter Quanti-
tative 
2. What is the percentage change in total revenue for [Bank 
Name] in Q1 2023 compared to the same quarter of the Quarter Quanti-
tative


[Page 17]
Appl. Sci. 2024, 14, 9318 17 of 19 
 
previous year? Find or calculate the percentage change in to-
tal revenue for [Bank Name] of Q1 2023 compared to the to 
the same quarter of the previous year. Include terms like ‘per-
centage growth’ or ‘percentage decline’ if mentioned. 
3. 
What is the net profit reported by [Bank Name] for the half-
year period H1 2022? Identify the net profit for [Bank Name] 
for the half-year period H1 2022, including any references to 
‘net income’ or ‘net earnings’. Ensure the figure reflects in-
come after all expenses. 
Half-
yearly 
Quanti-
tative 
4. 
What are the total assets held by [Bank Name] at the end of 
the half-yearly period H1 2023? Extract the total assets held 
by [Bank Name] at the end of the half-yearly period H1 2023. 
Include all categories such as cash, investments, loans, and 
other financial instruments. 
Half-
yearly 
Quanti-
tative 
5. 
What strategic initiatives or projects did [Bank Name] under-
take during the reporting period Q1 2022? Summarize the 
strategic initiatives or projects undertaken by [Bank Name] 
during the reporting period, including new product launches, 
market expansions, and digital transformation efforts. There 
might be also similar strategic initiatives or projects. 
Quarter Qualita-
tive 
6. 
What trends or market conditions affecting the banking sector 
were highlighted by [Bank Name] in their report of the half-
yearly period H1 2022? Highlight the trends or market condi-
tions affecting the banking sector as discussed by [Bank 
Name], such as interest rate changes, regulatory impacts, and 
technological advancements. There might be also similar 
trends and market conditions. 
Half-
yearly 
Qualita-
tive 
7. 
What key risks and challenges for the upcoming period did 
[Bank Name] identify in their report of the half-yearly period 
H1 2023?? Detail the key risks and challenges for the upcom-
ing period identified by [Bank Name] include, including any 
mention of credit risk, market volatility, and operational chal-
lenges. There might be also similar risks and key challenges. 
Half-
yearly 
Qualita-
tive 
References 
1. Zhao, W.X.; Zhou, K.; Li, J.; Tang, T.; Wang, X.; Hou, Y.; Min, Y.; Zhang, B.; Zhang, J.; Dong, Z.; et al. A Survey of Large Language 
Models. arXiv 2023, arXiv: 2303.18223. 
2. Brown, T.; Mann, B.; Ryder, N.; Subbiah, M.; Kaplan, J.D.; Dhariwal, P.; Neelakantan, A.; Shyam, P.; Sastry, G.; Askell, A. Lan -
guage Models are Few-Shot Learners. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 2020, 33, 1877–1901. 
3. Burtsev, M.; Reeves, M.; Job, A. The Working Limitations of Large Language Models. MIT Sloan Manag. Rev. 2024, 65, 8–10. 
4. Guu, K.; Lee, K.; Tung, Z.; Pasupat, P.; Chang, M. REALM: Retrieval-Augmented Language Model Pre-Training. In Proceedings 
of the International Conference on Machine Learning, PMLR, Vienna, Austria, 13–18 July 2020; pp. 3929–3938. 
5. Lewis, P.; Perez, E.; Piktus, A.; Petroni, F.; Karpukhin, V.; Goyal, N.; Kü ttler, H.; Lewis, M.; Yih, W.; Rocktäschel, T. Retrieval-
Augmented Generation for Knowledge-Intensive NLP Tasks.  Advances in Neural Info rmation Processing Systems 2020, 33, 
9459–9474. 
6. Gao, Y.; Xiong, Y.; Gao, X.; Jia, K.; Pan, J.; Bi, Y.; Dai, Y. ; Sun, J.; Guo, Q.; Wang, M.; et  al. Retrieval-Augmented Generation for 
Large Language Models: A Survey. arXiv 2024, arXiv: 2312.10997. 
7. IBM Research. What is Retrieval-Augmented Ge neration? IBM Research. Available online: h ttps://research.ibm.com/blog/re-
trieval-augmented-generation-RAG (accessed on 9 February 2021). 
8. Chen, J.; Lin, H.; Han, X.; Sun, L. Benchmarking large language  models in retrieval-augmented generation. In Proceedings of 
the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Vancouver, Canada, 20–27 February 2024; Volume 38, pp. 17754–17762. 
9. Shuster, K.; Poﬀ, S.; Chen, M.; Kiela, D.; Weston, J. Retrieval Augmentation Reduces Hallucination in Conversation. arXiv 2021, 
arXiv: 2104.07567.


[Page 18]
Appl. Sci. 2024, 14, 9318 18 of 19 
 
10. Anil, R.; Borgeaud, S.; Wu, Y.; Alayrac, J.-B.; Yu, J.; Soricut, R.; Schalkwyk, J.; Dai, A.M.; Hauth, A.; Millican, K.; et al. Gemini: A 
family of highly capable multimodal models. arXiv 2023, arXiv:2312.11805. 
11. Touvron, H.; Martin, L.; Stone, K.; Albert, P.; Almahairi, A.; Babaei, Y.; Bashlykov, N.; Batra, S.; Bhargava, P.; Bhosale, S.; et al. 
Llama 2: Open Foundation and Fine-Tuned Chat Models. arXiv 2023, arXiv: 2307.09288. 
12. He, H.; Zhang, H.; Roth, D. Rethinking with Retrieval: Faithful Large Language Model Inference. arXiv 2022, arXiv: 2301.00303. 
13. Shen, X.; Chen, Z.; Backes, M.; Zhang, Y. In ChatGPT We Trust? Measuring and Characterizing the Reliability of ChatGPT. arXiv 
2023, arXiv: 2304.08979. 
14. Zhang, Y.; Li, Y.; Cui, L.; Cai, D.; Liu, L.; Fu, T.; Huang, X.; Zhao, E.; Zhang, Y.; Chen, Y.; et al. Siren’s Song in the AI O cean: A 
Survey on Hallucination in Large Language Models. arXiv 2023, arXiv: 2309.01219. 
15. Borgeaud, S.; Mensch, A.; Hoﬀmann, J.; Cai, T.; Rutherford, E.; Millican, K.; Van Den Driessche, G.B.; Lespiau, J.-B.; Damoc, B.; 
Clark, A. Improving language models by retrieving from trillions of tokens. In Proceedings of the International Conference on 
Machine Learning, PMLR, Baltimore, MD, USA, 17–23 July 2022; pp. 2206–2240. 
16. Lyu, Y.; Li, Z.; Niu, S.; Xiong, F.; Tang, B.; Wang, W.; Wu, H.; Liu, H.; Xu, T.; Chen, E.; et al. CRUD-RAG: A Comprehensive 
Chinese Benchmark for Retrieval-Augmented Generation of Large Language Models. arXiv 2024, arXiv: 2401.17043. 
17. Es, S.; James, J.; Espinosa-Anke, L.; Schockaert, S. RAGAS: Automated Evaluation of Retrieval Augmented Generation. arXiv 
2023, arXiv: 2309.15217. 
18. Saad-Falcon, J.; Khattab, O.; Potts, C.; Zaharia, M. ARES: An Automated Evaluation Framework for Retrieval-Augmented Gen-
eration Systems. arXiv 2023, arXiv: 2311.09476. 
19. Ragas. Core Concepts. Ragas. 2023. Available online: h ttps://docs.ragas.io/en/latest/concepts/index.html (accessed on 10 July 
2024). 
20. TruLens. RAG Triad. TruLen s. 2024. Available online: h ttps://truera.com/ai-quality-education/generative-ai-rags/what-is-the-
rag-triad/ (accessed on 10 July 2024). 
21. Besbes, A. A 3-Step Approach to Evaluate a Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG). Towards Da ta Science. Available online: 
https://towardsdatascience.com/a-3-step-approach-to-evaluate-a-retrieval-augmented-generation-rag-5acf2aba86de (accessed 
on 23 November 2023). 
22. Besbes, A. Quickly Evaluate your RAG Without Manually Labeling Test Data. Towards Data Science. Available online: https://to-
wardsdatascience.com/quickly-evaluate-your-rag-without-manually-labeling-test-data-43ade0ae187a (accessed on 21 Decem-
ber 2023). 
23. Frenchi, C. Evaluating RAG: Using LLMs to Automate Benchmarking of Retrieval Augmented Generation Systems. Willow Tree 
Apps. Available online: h ttps://www.willowtreeapps.com/craft/evaluating-rag-using-llms-to-automate-benchmarking-of-re-
trieval-augmented-generation-systems (accessed on 1 December 2023). 
24. Leal, M.; Frenchi, C. Evaluating Truthfulness: Benchm arking LLM Accuracy. Willow Tree Apps. Available online: 
https://www.willowtreeapps.com/craft/evaluating-truthfulness-a-deeper-dive-into-benchmarking-llm-accuracy (accessed on 
21 September 2023). 
25. Nguyen, R. LlamaIndex: How To Evaluate Your RAG (Retrieval Augmented Generation) Applications. Be tter Programming. 
Available online: h ttps://betterprogramming.pub/llamaindex-how-to-evaluate-your-rag-retrieval-augmented-generation-ap-
plications-2c83490f489 (accessed on 1 October 2023). 
26. Sarmah, B.; Zhu, T.; Mehta, D.; Pasquali, S. Towards re ducing hallucination in ex tracting information from ﬁnancial reports 
using Large Language Models. arXiv 2023, arXiv: 2310.10760. 
27. Yepes, A.J.; You, Y.; Milczek, J.; Laverde, S.; Li, R. Financial Report Chunking for E ﬀective Retrieval Augmented Generation. 
arXiv 2024, arXiv: 2402.05131. 
28. Zhang, B.; Yang, H.; Zhou, T.; Ali Babar, M.; Liu, X.-Y. Enhancing Financial Sentiment Analysis via Retrieval Augmented Large 
Language Models. In Proceedings of the Fourth ACM International Conference on AI in Finance, Brooklyn, NY, USA, 27–29 
November 2023; pp. 349–356. 
29. Hevner, A.; Chatterjee, S. Design Science Research in Information Systems. In Design Research in Information Systems: Theory and 
Practice; Hevner, A., Cha tterjee, S., Eds.; Spring er: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2010; pp. 9–22. h ttps://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-
4419-5653-8_2. 
30. HuggingFace. MiniLMEmbedder. HuggingFace. Available online: h ttps://huggingface.co/sentence-transformers/all-MiniLM-
L6-v2 (accessed on 18 January 2024). 
31. LangChain. Bedrock Embeddings. La ngChain. 2023. Available online: h ttps://python.langchain.com/v0.1/docs/integra-
tions/text_embedding/bedrock/ (accessed on 10 July 2024). 
32. Meta. Faiss: A Library for E ﬃcient Similarity Search. Meta. Available online: https://engineering.fb.com/2017/03/29/data-infra-
structure/faiss-a-library-for-eﬃcient-similarity-search/ (accessed on 29 March 2017). 
33. Chroma. Chroma Docs. Chroma. 2024. Available online: https://docs.trychroma.com/getting-started (accessed on 10 July 2024). 
34. OpenAI. OpenAI Platform. OpenAI. 2024. Available online: h ttps://platform.openai.com/docs/overview (accessed on 10 July 
2024). 
35. Meta. Meta Llama 3. Meta. 2024. Available online: https://llama.meta.com/llama3/ (accessed on 10 July 2024). 
36. Google DeepMind. Gemini Pro 1.5. Google DeepMind. Available online: https://deepmind.google/technologies/gemini/pro/ (ac-
cessed on 20 May 2024).


[Page 19]
Appl. Sci. 2024, 14, 9318 19 of 19 
 
37. LangChain. Introduction to LangChain. LangChain. 2023. Available online: https://python.langchain.com/v0.1/docs/get_started/in-
troduction/ (accessed on 10 July 2024). 
38. LlamaIndex. LlamaIndex Docs. Llam aIndex. 2024. Available online: h ttps://docs.llamaindex.ai/en/stable/ (accessed on 10 July 
2024). 
39. Weaviate. Verba Docs. GitHub. 2024. Available online: https://github.com/weaviate/Verba (accessed on 10 July 2024). 
40. Weaviate. Verba—Demo Tool. Weaviate. 2024. Available online: https://verba.weaviate.io/ (accessed on 10 July 2024). 
41. OpenAI. Hello GPT-4o. OpenAI. Available online: https://openai.com/index/hello-gpt-4o/ (accessed on 13 May 2024). 
42. Google. Gemini 1.5 Pro Now Available in 180+ Countries. Google. Available online: https://developers.googleblog.com/en/gem-
ini-15-pro-now-available-in-180-countries-with-native-audio-understanding-system-instructions-json-mode-and-more/ (ac-
cessed on 9 April 2024). 
43. Google. Gemini 1.5 Pro updates.  Google. Available online: h ttps://blog.google/technology/developers/gemini-gemma-devel-
oper-updates-may-2024/ (accessed on 14 May 2024). 
44. Large Model Systems Organization. LLM Leaderboard. LMSYS. Available online: https://chat.lmsys.org/?leaderboard (accessed 
on 6 June 2024). 
45. Hendrycks, D.; Burns, C.; Basart, S.; Zou, A.; Mazeika, M.; Song, D.; Steinhardt, J. Measuring Massive Multitask Language 
Understanding. In Proceedings of the 9th International Confer ence on Learning Representations, ICLR 2021, Virtual Event, 
Austria, 3–7 May 2021; pp. 11260–11285. 
46. Papers with Code. Multi-task Language Understanding on MMLU. Papers with Code. 2024. Available online: h ttps://pa-
perswithcode.com/sota/multi-task-language-understanding-on-mmlu (accessed on 10 July 2024). 
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual au-
thor(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the edit or(s) disclaim responsibility for any inju ry to 
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.