[Page 1]
Vol.:(0123456789)
The Review of Socionetwork Strategies (2024) 18:255–278
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12626-024-00169-z
ARTICLE
Event Identification for Supply Chain Risk Management 
Through News Analysis by Using Large Language Models
Maryam Shahsavari1  · Omar Khadeer Hussain1 · Morteza Saberi2 · 
Pankaj Sharma1
Received: 12 February 2024 / Accepted: 28 June 2024 / Published online: 15 July 2024 
© The Author(s) 2024
Abstract
Event identification is important in many areas of the business world. In the sup-
ply chain risk management domain, the timely identification of risk events is vital 
to ensure the success of supply chain operations. One of the important sources of 
real-time information from across the world is news sources. However, the analy -
sis of large amounts of daily news cannot be done manually by humans. On the 
other hand, extracting related news depends on the query or the keyword used in the 
search engine and the news content. Recent advancements in artificial intelligence 
have opened up opportunities to leverage intelligent techniques to automate this 
analysis. This paper introduces the LUEI framework, a lightweight framework that, 
with only the event’s name as input, can autonomously learn all the related phrases 
associated with that event. It then employs these phrases to search for relevant news 
and presents the search engine results with a label indicating their relevance. Hence, 
by conducting this analysis, the LUEI framework is able to identify the occurrence 
of the event in the real world. The framework’s novel contribution lies in its ability 
to identify those events (termed as the Contributing Events (CEs)) that contribute 
to the occurrence of a risk event, offering a proactive approach to risk management 
in supply chains. Pinpointing CEs from vast news data gives supply chain managers 
actionable insights to mitigate risks before they escalate.
Keywords Supply chain risk management · Event identification · Risk 
identification · Large language models · Bayesian network · Natural language 
processing · Information retrieval
 * Maryam Shahsavari 
 m.shahsavari@unsw.edu.au
1 School of Business, UNSW Canberra, Northcott Drive, Campbell, Canberra, ACT  , Australia
2 School of Computer Science, UTS, 15 Broadway Ultimo, Sydney, NSW, Australia


[Page 2]
256 The Review of Socionetwork Strategies (2024) 18:255–278
1 Introduction
Supply chain risk management (SCRM) is a systematic and iterative approach 
involving risk identification, assessment, treatment, and monitoring to manage sup-
ply chain business operations [1–3]. This research focuses on the step of risk identi-
fication, which involves identifying disruptive events before their potential impact on 
operations is quantified. The successful completion of the risk identification phase is 
important as it allows the risk manager to develop appropriate strategies to address 
these vulnerabilities during the risk management process. By using quantitative or 
qualitative approaches, existing works on proactive risk identification aim to deter -
mine the risk event/s that have the potential to impact the outcome to be achieved 
[4–9]. While this is beneficial, it does not consider the contributing events (CEs) 
leading to the risk event, thereby limiting their ability to proactively determine the 
occurrence of the risks. This is supported by Cohen et al. [10] and Chapman et al. 
[11] who state that a company assessing its supply chain risk exposure, apart from 
merely identifying the risk event/s, must also identify the potential causes and CEs 
leading to such risk event/s. To explain with an example, during the COVID-19 pan-
demic, staff shortage was one of the risk events impacting supply chain companies. 
However, this risk event occurs for many reasons. For example, an increased number 
of COVID cases will result in border closures (see Fig  1). It will also result in the 
likelihood of more staff becoming sick, so they must quarantine. When these fac-
tors occur simultaneously, they lead to the risk event of staff shortage. As shown in 
Fig  1, in this scenario, the red node is the risk event, and all the other nodes are CEs. 
This paper emphasises that the early identification of any of these CEs can help in 
the early detection of the risk event and the organization can proactively implement 
any preventive actions it deems necessary to take. Thus, constructing a network of 
CEs that may lead to specific risks is an important first step.
Fig. 1  CEs leading to the occurrence of a risk event


[Page 3]
257
The Review of Socionetwork Strategies (2024) 18:255–278 
To achieve this aim, in this paper, we propose an artificial intelligence (AI)-based 
framework named Contributing Event-based Risk Identification and Assessment 
(CERIA) for supply chains. CERIA comprises two steps: (a) it builds a causal rela-
tionship between a risk event and its CEs by analyzing past news data and utilizing a 
Bayesian network (BN) to map these relationships, and (b) it continuously monitors 
the daily news to detect the occurrence of these CEs. After identifying the occur -
rence of a CE in the daily news, CERIA evaluates its likelihood of occurrence and 
integrates it into the BN, which calculates the probability of the occurrence of the 
potential risk event. This paper focuses on CERIA’s second step, identifying the 
occurrence of CEs in news sources. Many researchers have tackled this problem 
by developing data-processing AI models that identify the events in a sentence. For 
these models to work, they need huge preprocessed or annotated data, to train them-
selves before being applied to real-world data, otherwise they will not have meaning-
ful output. While having training data is achievable if these methods aim to ascertain 
a commonly occurring risk event (which may be limited in number), it is impracti-
cable when they need to be applied to multiple CEs, particularly when these risk 
events are previously unknown. This may be due to various reasons, the primary one 
being the lack of data related to these CEs on which the data-processing AI models 
can be trained. This paper addresses this problem by utilizing the notion of seed 
phrases related to the CEs. Seed phrases are keywords related to the CEs that are 
utilised to find relevant news articles for that particular CE. Our proposed approach, 
which we term a Lightweight Unsupervised Event Identification (LUEI) framework, 
addresses this gap by developing a lightweight and unsupervised method that does 
not require such a large amount of preprocessing to achieve results. The research 
question addressed in this paper is:
Given an established causal relationship between a risk event and its CEs, how 
can the occurrences of these CEs in real-world news articles be determined without 
any training data?
To demonstrate the working of the LUEI framework, we consider a case scenario 
where the supply chain manager considers delivery delays as the risk event of inter -
est. Using the first part of CERIA, the supply chain manager identifies increase in 
COVID-19 cases, Australian Football League (AFL) matches leading to  road clo-
sures, s  hortage of airport staff, and construction workers’ strike  (both leading 
to road closures) as the CEs leading to delivery delays. Using advanced AI-based 
methods, the LUEI framework ascertains the occurrence of an event in real-world 
news articles. So, the competency requirements that we define to analyse the effec-
tiveness of the LUEI framework are:
1.1  Competency Requirements to Address the Research Question
1- How does the LUEI framework identify the seed phrases related to a CE?
2- How effective is the LUEI framework in identifying the occurrences of an event 
in the real world by monitoring and analyzing news articles?
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section  2 discusses the 
related work. Section  3 details the CERIA framework and its different modules. In


[Page 4]
258 The Review of Socionetwork Strategies (2024) 18:255–278
Section  4, we delve into the methodology of the LUEI framework. Section  5 pre-
sents the results of the LUEI framework and compares its efficiency with other 
approaches  of selecting news that contain the  event of interest. Section  6 demon-
strates how the LUEI framework answers the competency questions. Section  7 con-
cludes the paper with a discussion on future work.
2  Related Work
Event extraction is part of information retrieval, one of the Natural Language Pro-
cessing (NLP) applications [12]. The goal of event extraction from text is to detect 
any instance of the event and its type and attributes. To extract events, research-
ers aim to identify the event and its related information, which is the answer to the 
5W1H questions (i.e. who, when, where, what, why, how) related to that event [12]. 
Leban, Fortuna, Brank and Grobelnik [13] developed an approach to detect events 
in news articles by clustering the news that mentions them. The clustering model is 
trained using manually labelled data. To detect the events in each cluster, the name 
entities are extracted, and based on their frequency of use, they are weighted. One 
of the important parts of the learning process in deep learning and machine learn-
ing techniques is the training data. Chen, Xu, Liu, Zeng and Zhao [14] developed 
an event extraction method to automatically extract lexical-level and sentence-level 
learning features and then pass this training data to the neural network. In this way, 
the human effort required to preprocess the data is reduced. The authors also devel-
oped a dynamic multi-pooling convolutional neural network (DMCNN) for event 
extraction. Other researchers such as Yang, Feng, Qiao, Kan and Li [15] used the 
BERT pre-trained language model, which automatically generates training data 
instead of manually annotated data. They also proposed a method for overcoming 
the role overlap problem. Zhang et al. [16] introduced a multi-task learning approach 
to address the challenges of data scarcity and the under-utilization of training data 
in event detection. This approach effectively harnesses additional knowledge. To be 
more precise, the authors introduce two methods for integrating a bi-directional neu-
ral language model at both the word and character levels.
Han, Huang and Liu [17] proposed a method for news recommendation. They 
proposed a model for event extraction and then used the trained model for news 
recommendation. Zhukov, Andrianova and Trifonova [18] proposed a method that 
can predict the events in news feeds based on an analysis of the dynamic characters 
of the events. However, it does not identify or detect the occurrence of an event. 
Bhokare, Sonawane and Sonawane [19] focused on financial event detection using 
classification. However, this, too, requires data for the model to train on it first. 
Other researchers used other text sources, such as social network data for event iden-
tification using text features and long short-term memory (LSTM), multi-task learn-
ing (MTL) or locality sensitive hashing (LSH) methods for training their proposed 
model [20–23]. While these approaches use different methods, they have a common 
goal: identifying events in a sentence. This is done using preprocessed data manually 
curated or generated by a system. In both scenarios, the availability of training data 
is crucial for achieving meaningful results. In scenarios where this is not possible,


[Page 5]
259
The Review of Socionetwork Strategies (2024) 18:255–278 
these methods fail. The proposed LUEI framework addresses this by recognizing the 
occurrence of events with only the event’s name as input. We evaluated the proposed 
LUEI framework in two different ways. In the first approach, we compared the short-
listed news given by the LUEI framework (by using the determined seed phrases for 
the searching event) with those shortlisted news articles when only the name of the 
event or the name, along with its synonyms, were used. In the second approach, we 
compared the final output of the LUEI framework with two other approaches from 
the literature namely EventRegistry and Aylien. This has been explained in section 5 
after explaining the LUEI framework.
3  CERIA Framework
Figure  2 illustrates the CERIA framework architecture comprising different mod-
ules. We first define the key terms before explaining the different modules of the 
CERIA framework.
3.1  Key Terms
3.1.1  Risk Event
A risk event is any unexpected event that can negatively affect supply chains and 
cause disruptions. As shown in Fig.  1, staff shortage can be a risk event in the sup-
ply chain.
Fig. 2  CERIA framework (Recreated from [27])


[Page 6]
260 The Review of Socionetwork Strategies (2024) 18:255–278
3.1.2  Contributing Events (CEs)
CEs are those events that can either occur before a risk event or are a precursor to it. 
As shown in Fig.  1, events such as an increase in COVID cases, more staff getting 
sick and an increase in home quarantine are events that lead to the risk event of s t a ff 
shortage. These events are termed CEs to the risk event.
3.1.3  Seed Phrases
Seed phrases refer to an event’s variant names. For example, "fall" is a variant of 
"autumn". Similarly, "strike" is a variant of "industrial action". Fall and strike are 
members of the seed phrases set for autumn and industrial action, respectively and 
are used when news about autumn and industrial action is being searched for. This is 
crucial as they uncover a broader range of news articles about a specific event.
3.1.4  Bayesian Networks (BNs)
BNs are mathematical models representing the interaction between variables with 
cause-effect connections. Such models explicitly represent the uncertain information 
and propagate this uncertainty to generate the model outputs [24, 25].
3.1.5  Natural Language Processing (NLP)
NLP techniques are machine learning methods that assist machines to process text in 
a similar way to a human.
3.1.6  Large Language Model (LLM)
LLMs are models that are trained on large amounts of data and can perform NLP-
related tasks with a high level of accuracy [26].
3.2  Modules of the CERIA Framework
3.2.1  Causal Relationship Extractor Module
As shown in Fig.  2, the first module of CERIA is the Causal Relationship Extractor 
which builds the causal relationships between the CEs and risk events. This is done 
by analyzing historical news related to risk events and identifying the key CEs lead-
ing to that risk event. The details of this module are as follows:
Input of this module: Risk events for which the risk manager wants to build a BN.
Output of this module: The BN of causal relationship between risk event and 
CEs.
Process to achieve it: AI techniques that analyse news to find the causal relation-
ships between the risk event and the CEs.


[Page 7]
261
The Review of Socionetwork Strategies (2024) 18:255–278 
3.2.2  Seed Collector Module
Seed Collector is the second module of CERIA. For each CE, this module gener -
ates its seed phrases. This step is crucial as different instances of a CE can be used 
to refer to it in news articles. For instance, "fall" might also be called "autumn". So, 
this module generates the seed phrases for each CE, aiding in their subsequent iden-
tification in news articles. The details of this module are as follows:
Input of this module: The CEs.
Output of this module: Seed phrases for each CE.
Process to achieve it: Different NLP techniques to analyze news articles from the 
previous 3 years.
3.2.3  News Crawler Module
News Crawler is the third module of CERIA. This module utilizes the seed phrases 
for each CE to search for relevant news articles on Google News, a prominent online 
news aggregator. The details of this module are as follows:
Input of this module: The seed phrases of each CE.
Output of this module: News articles which mention the CE.
Process to achieve it: Application Programming Interface (API) for searching 
Google news.
3.2.4  Event Detector Module
The Event Detector Module is the fourth module of CERIA. This module analyzes 
each news article from the previous module to ascertain whether it relates to the 
occurrence of the CEs. This module returns a binary value of 0 or 1. A value of 1 
means that the event is recognized to be happening, while 0 indicates the reverse. 
The details of this module are as follows:
Input of this module: News articles from the previous module.
Output of this module: The binary value of occurrence of a CE.
Process to achieve it: AI techniques and LLMs to analyse the news articles.
3.2.5  Probability Assigner Module
The Probability Assigner Module is the fifth module of CERIA [27]. If a CE is iden-
tified as occurring, this module will process the relevant news articles collected in 
the News Crawler Module and analyze them to assign them a probability score of 
occurring. The details of this module are as follows:
Input of this module: CEs marked with a label of 1, indicating they are occurring.
Output of this module: the probability of the occurrence of the CE.
Process to achieve it: analyzing the news list related to the CE


[Page 8]
262 The Review of Socionetwork Strategies (2024) 18:255–278
Table 1  Inputs/Outputs and Processes of the different modules of the CERIA framework
Module Input Output Process
Causal Relationship Extractor Risk event BN of causal relationship AI techniques to find the causal relationships 
between events
Seed Collector The CEs Seed phrases for each CE NLP techniques to analyze news articles from 
the previous 3 years
News Crawler The seed phrases for each CE News articles which mention the CE as hap-
pening
API for searching Google news
Event Detector News articles from News Crawler module The binary value of occurrence of a CE AI techniques and LLMs to analyse the news 
articles
Probability Assigner CEs marked with a label of 1 The probability of the occurrence of the CE Analyzing the news list related to the CE
Output Generator CEs with a probability of occurrence Probability of occurrence of the risk event Propagating the probability in BN


[Page 9]
263
The Review of Socionetwork Strategies (2024) 18:255–278 
3.2.6  Output Generator Module
The Output Generation Module is the sixth and last module of CERIA. This module 
integrates the probability of the occurrence’s score ascertained for each CE in the 
BN to generate CERIA’s final output, the probability of the risk event occurring. 
The details of this module are as follows:
Input of this module: CEs with a probability of occurrence.
Output of this module: Probability of occurrence of the risk event.
Process to achieve it: Propagating the probability in BN.
Table  1 shows input, output and the process of each module in summary. As dis-
cussed in Sect.  1, this paper focuses on CERIA’s step of identifying the occurrences 
of CEs from news sources. So, it assumes that the Causal Relationship Extractor 
module has determined the causal relationship of the risk event of interest with its 
corresponding CEs. To identify their occurrence, these CEs will be given as the 
input to CERIA’s second module, followed by modules 3 and 4. The LUEI frame-
work encompasses modules 2, 3 and 4. Figure  3 shows the hierarchy of CERIA and 
LUEI framework.
4  Working Details of the LUEI Framework
Figure  4 shows our LUEI framework which automatically discovers news articles 
related to the predefined CEs and identifies the occurrence of the CE by analyzing 
the news. The proposed framework incorporates Modules 2, 3 and 4 of the CERIA 
framework. The first module, Seed Collector, uses WordNet and news articles from 
Fig. 3  Relationship between LUEI and CERIA framework


[Page 10]
264 The Review of Socionetwork Strategies (2024) 18:255–278
the past 3 years to generate a set of phrases, termed Seed − Phrases , related to the 
CE. The second module, News Crawler, uses the Seed − Phrases to search for news 
articles that are related to the CE. We utilize Google News as the news source in this 
research. However, it is important to note that the presence of the Seed − Phrases in 
the body of the news does not guarantee that it relates to the CE. So, Event Detector 
is the fourth module that thoroughly analyses the news article’s content to determine 
if it relates to the CE. In this section, we comprehensively explain the workings of 
each module in the proposed method.
4.1  Seed Collector Module
To conduct a comprehensive search on Google News for each event, we must avoid 
restricting our search to a specific term. This is done to ensure that other contextu-
ally relevant news articles are not missed if they do not contain the exact keyword 
used in the search. Therefore, for each CE, we need a set of appropriate phrases 
known as Seed − Phrases that are contextually similar to the name of the CE. For 
instance, "industrial action" is equivalent to "strike". If we only use the keyword 
"strike" for the search, we may overlook news articles that do not contain the word 
"strike" but instead include the phrase "industrial action." Hence, "industrial action" 
should be included as one of the Seed − Phrases for the event "strike." The Seed 
Collector module determines the Seed − Phrases for each CE and has two steps, 
explained as follows:
Fig. 4  LUEI framework


[Page 11]
265
The Review of Socionetwork Strategies (2024) 18:255–278 
4.1.1  Step 1. Finding the Equivalent Phrases of a CE Using WordNet
This step utilizes WordNet to identify each CE’s synonyms or equivalent phrases in 
two sub-steps:
Step 1.1: Generating initial Seed − Phrases for the CE’s name using WordNet: 
Since WordNet only provides synonyms for individual words, we divide the name 
of each CE into its constituent words. For example, if our event of interest is 
“staff shortage”, then we consider “staff” and “shortage” separately. So the out-
put of this process for the event “staff shortage” is: “staff” + “shortage”. After 
this, WordNet is used to find the synonyms for each word. For example, the syno-
nyms for “staff” would be “staff”, “faculty”, and “stave”, and for “shortage,” it 
would be “shortage”, “deficit”, “shortfall”, “dearth” and “famine”. By maintain-
ing the word order in each CE’s name, we merge all the synonyms to generate 
new equivalents for each CE. This involves considering all possible combinations 
of words. For example, the output of this step encompasses various combinations 
and consists of phrases such as "staff shortage", "staff deficit", "staff shortfall", 
"staff dearth", "staff famine", "stave shortfall", "stave dearth", and "stave fam-
ine". All these terms are added to the Seed − Phrases set. The size of this set is ∏n
i=1 mi , where n refers to the number of words in the CE’s name and mi refers to 
the number of equivalents for the ith word returned by WordNet. Seed − Phrasej 
is defined as jth seed-phrase in the Seed − Phrases set. It is important to note that 
not all equivalents provided by WordNet carry the same contextual meaning we 
seek. Therefore, a filtering process is necessary, which is undertaken in Step 1.2.
Step 1.2. Pruning the initial Seed − Phrases set using semantic similarity to the CE’s name:  
Some phrases created in Step 1.1 may not be semantically equal to the event’s 
name. For example, the words "stave shortage" or "stave deficit" are contextu-
ally different to the CE of "staff shortage" because stave means a wooden log 
and semantically doesn’t have the same meaning as the CE’s name and should be 
omitted. We use SBERT sentence embedding [28] for the embedding process and 
then cosine similarity to compute the semantic similarity between the equivalents 
and the CE’s name. Multiple pre-trained sentence embedding models are avail-
able for this purpose. Since the length of the query (equivalent - new phrase) 
and the length of the passage (CE’s name) are similar, a symmetric semantic 
search model is utilized. Three different models were tested, and the "multi-qa-
mpnet-base-dot-v1" model was the most suitable for this task, as it is specifically 
designed for a symmetric semantic search. The cosine similarity between the vec-
tors generated for each equivalent phrase and the CE is calculated to determine 
their similarity. Ultimately, only the equivalents with a similarity score of 0.8 or 
higher are selected as equivalent phrases for the event’s name. Algorithm 1 shows 
the working process of Step 1.2. The working process of Step 1, including its sub-
steps, is illustrated in Fig. 5  for the event "Staff Shortage".


[Page 12]
266 The Review of Socionetwork Strategies (2024) 18:255–278
Algorithm 1  (offline mode). Pruning the initial Seed-Phrases  for event’s name by 
using semantic similarity
4.1.2  Step 2. Adding More Related Phrases to Seed − Phrases Set by Analyzing News 
from the Past 3 Years
In this step, we use the pruned Seed − Phrases set to conduct a targeted search for 
them in Google News for the past 3 years. This is to achieve two aims. The first 
aim is to ensure the seed phrase is relevant and returns at least one news article 
from the past 3 years. Including news from more than 3 years ago would collect 
outdated phrases, potentially incorporating those no longer in use. On the other 
hand, limiting the analysis to a period shorter than 3 years may result in losing 
important recent seed phrases. Thus, the search period of 3 years is considered 
as it is recent enough to reflect current trends and terminologies yet sufficient to 
observe evolving patterns and recurring themes in news events.
Fig. 5  Working process of Step 1 of the Seed Collector module for the event: "Staff Shortage"


[Page 13]
267
The Review of Socionetwork Strategies (2024) 18:255–278 
The second aim is to find more terms related to the event’s name to expand the 
search scope. To achieve the first aim, news articles are searched for each phrase 
from the Seed − Phrases . The obtained collection of news articles is referred to 
as News − Collection . If no news articles are found for a certain phrase from the 
Seed − Phrases , that phrase is excluded from the final Seed − Phrases set. How -
ever, if any news articles are discovered to contain a particular phrase, that phrase 
will remain in the final Seed − Phrases set. The matched news articles related 
to each phrase are analyzed to extract their keywords by using KeyBERT [29], 
which identifies the most important phrases within a document. Each extracted 
keyword’s cosine similarity with CE’s name is calculated using symmetric 
semantic similarity. As shown in our previous work [30], it was observed that all 
the equivalents with a similarity score of equal to or more than 0.8 have the same 
meaning as the main phrase. So, we chose 0.8 as the threshold to consider that 
equivalent as the seed phrase. Therefore, if the similarity between the extracted 
keyword and CE’s name is equal to or greater than 0.8, and the keyword does not 
already exist in the Seed − Phrases set, it is added to the Seed − Phrases set (see 
Fig.  6). Algorithm  2 shows the pseudocode for updating the Seed − Phrases set 
using the past 3 years’ history of news articles. For example, for the event "con-
struction workers hold strike", "construction workers hold industrial action" is 
one of the seed phrases added to the Seed − Phrases set in Step 1.1. By using this 
seed phrase as the search query, a collection of news articles ( News − Collection ) 
is built. For each news article ( Newsj ) in News − Collection , a list of key -
words is extracted and stored in Keyword_Collectionj . For each keywordk in 
Keyword_Collectionj , its semantic similarity with the event’s name is determined 
using the process described in Step 1.2, and if it is greater than the threshold, it is 
added to the Seed − Phrases set.
Fig. 6  Step 2 of Seed Collector module for the event: "Staff Shortage"


[Page 14]
268 The Review of Socionetwork Strategies (2024) 18:255–278
Algorithm 2  (offline mode). Adding more related phrases to Seed − Phrases
Once the Seed-Collector finishes collecting the seed phrases, the Seed − Phrases 
set is passed on to the next module called the "News Crawler" module to find the 
pertinent news articles related to each event within the specified time frame.
4.2  News Crawler Module
As previously discussed, we use the Google News search engine as the source of 
news. To crawl the news in Google News, we use the pygooglenews API (https:// 
pypi. org/ proje ct/ pygoo glene ws/). This API gets some parameters as input such 
as, keyword, date, language and country, and returns the news which match the 
parameters. These news are extracted from Google News search engine. The output 
of the "News Crawler" module is the news articles that contain phrases from the 
Seed − Phrase set. However, these may be in different combinations. For instance, if 
we search for the phrase "increase in COVID cases," the search results include news 
articles that mention the words "increase", "in", "COVID" and "cases" in the body 
of the article or, in some cases, news articles that don’t have these keywords in their 
body, but some of the words appear somewhere in the margin of the news. Although 
enclosing the search phrase in double quotation marks to retrieve exact matches is 
possible, this approach may yield limited results. We may also get news articles with 
different meanings to the CE’s name. For example, if we search for "staff shortage," 
we might come across news articles that discuss improving staff performance in one 
paragraph and address a shortage of tools or equipment in the workplace in another. 
Although both words of the search phrase are present in the news article, the article 
itself may not be relevant to the desired CE. To filter out such noisy data from our 
news collection, the next module analyzes each news article, based on which it will 
decide whether the event of interest is happening.
4.3  Event Detector Module
This module aims to filter out news articles which are irrelevant to the CE’s name. 
This is done by utilizing the SBERT sentence embedding technique and the "multi-
qa-MiniLM-L6-cos-v1" pre-trained model to convert the entire text of a news article


[Page 15]
269
The Review of Socionetwork Strategies (2024) 18:255–278 
into a vector. The same process is applied to the event of interest. Semantic search is 
then performed by calculating the cosine similarity between the two vectors. If the 
semantic similarity is more than 0.5, then the news article is considered to relate to 
CE. For example, for the event, "staff shortage", this module converts the news arti-
cle related to that term into a vector along with the term "staff shortage". The cosine 
similarity between these vectors is then computed, and if it is more than 0.5, it is 
considered relevant. We selected the threshold 0.5 by examining over 1000 news 
articles for four CEs and determined the threshold level that gives the correct match-
ing results. The output of this module is a binary label with values "0" and "1." 
News articles labeled "1" indicate that they suggest the event is mentioned in the 
news article as either happening or will happen, while those labeled "0" are recog-
nized as non-relevant news articles that do not pertain to the event. Clearly, when 
the system designates at least one event as "1," it implies a positive occurrence of 
that event. The risk manager can use this information for further analysis. For events 
identified as relevant, the CERIA assigns a probability score for their occurrence. 
This score is then utilized in the BN to evaluate the probability of the risk event 
happening.
The next section discusses the experiments we performed to demonstrate the 
effectiveness of the proposed approach.
5  Results and Evaluation
To evaluate the performance of the LUEI framework, we evaluated the Seed Collec-
tor module, followed by the News Crawler module. Then, using the results generated 
by these modules, we evaluated the performance of the Event Detector Module in 
two different ways. Firt we made the evaluation against manual approach in which 
we used the output of Google search news. In the second approach we compared 
the output of LUEI framework with other two frameworks. In both scenarios we 
used expert knowledge. To conduct the first approach of evaluation  we have  con-
sidered four CEs, namely "Increase In COVID Cases", "AFL Matches Happen-
ing", "Airport Staff Shortage" and "Construction Workers Hold Strike" which 
lead to the risk event of "Delay in Delivery". We aim to evaluate the performance of 
the LUEI framework and assess its ability to recognize the relevant news related to 
these CEs and separate the non-relevant ones. As mentioned in the previous section, 
Step 1 of the Seed Collector module consists of two steps. Step 1.1 involves extract-
ing WordNet equivalents for the CE’s name. After completing this step for the CE 
"Increase in Covid cases", 1537 equivalents were identified for the CE’s name. Step 
1.2 calculated the semantic similarity between the equivalents and the CE’s name, a 
snapshot of which is shown in Table   2 for the CE "Increase in COVID Cases". Only 
equivalents with a semantic similarity score of 0.8 or higher with the CE’s name 
were added to the initial Seed − Phrases set. The initial Seed − Phrases set was used 
in Step 2 to generate the final Seed − Phrases set as shown in Tables   3, 4, 5 and   6. 
These terms are later used to search for news articles related to CEs.
In the first approach of evaluation we demonstrate the effectiveness of the LUEI 
framework in searching for the CEs by conducting three experiments. In the first


[Page 16]
270 The Review of Socionetwork Strategies (2024) 18:255–278
Table 5  Final seed-phrase set for event: "Airport Staff Shortage"
Airport staff deficit Airport staff shortage
Airport staff shortfall Insufficient staffing airports
Airport labor shortage Inadequate airport staff
Dearth of airport staff
Table 2  A snapshot of the outcome of step 1 of the Seed Collector module for the event "Increase in 
Covid cases"
WordNet equivalents Semantic similarity
Increase in covid instance 0.87
Increase inward covid character 0.68
Addition inward covid cause 0.63
Addition inward covid suit 0.53
Gain indium covid typeface 0.35
Step-up indium covid pillow_slip 0.16
Step-up indium covid showcase 0.2
Increase inch covid instance 0.7
Growth indium covid suit 0.46
Addition indium covid slip 0.28
Table 3  Final seed-phrase set for event: "Increase in Covid cases"
Increase in covid instances Steep increase in coronavirus infections
Increase in covid cases  Growth in covid cases
Rise in coronavirus cases  Covid cases risen
Table 4  Final seed-phrase set for event: "AFL Matches Happening"
AFL match happening AFL match occurrence
Aflw matches happening Teams afl play
Aflw match happening Aflw game
Afl match starting Matches week afl
Aflw showdown Aflw showdown slated
Blockbuster afl match Afl season fixture
Rivalries going afl Afl showdown game
Afl championship match Live AFL contests
Playing AFL encounters In-session AFL bouts
In-play AFL confrontations Unfolding AFL games
Present AFL competitions Currently playing AFL matchups
Real-time AFL battles On-field AFL confrontations
Running AFL showdowns Happening AFL face-offs


[Page 17]
271
The Review of Socionetwork Strategies (2024) 18:255–278 
experiment (termed Single Keyword), we used only the CE’s name, for example, 
"increase in Covid cases", as the keyword for searching the relevant news. Two 
experts labelled the news as relevant or non-relevant on the returned results. In the 
second experiment (termed Keyword + WordNet Equivalent), we used the CE’s 
name and its equivalents created in Step 1 of the Seed Collector module to search for 
relevant news. We again asked the two experts to label the news as relevant or non-
relevant on the returned results. In the third experiment (termed LUEI), we used the 
final Seed − Phrases set generated by LUEI framework to search for news related to 
the CE. As explained in Section  4.3, the LUEI framework classifies the news articles 
into two categories: "0" (non-relevant), indicating that the news does not mention 
the event as likely to happen, and "1" (relevant) indicating that the shortlisted news 
refers to the CE as occurring. We again asked the two experts to label the news as 
relevant or non-relevant on the returned results. Once the labelling by the experts 
on the different sets of experiments was done, the True Positive (TP), False Positive 
(FP), True Negative (TN), and False Negative (FN) of each method were computed 
(see Tables 7, 8, 9 and 10). The semantics of the measures are as follows:
• TP: This measure shows the number of news articles a model recommended and 
confirmed by both experts as relevant.
• FP: This measure shows the number of news articles a model recommended but 
labelled by any one of the experts as irrelevant.
Table 6  Final seed-phrase set for event: "Construction Workers Hold Strike"
Construction worker hold strike Building worker strike
Structure worker strike Construction workers protest
Building site worker industrial action Construction labor unrest
Table 7  Confusion matrix for "Increase In Covid Cases"
Category Single Keyword  Keyword + WordNet Equivalents LUEI framework
TP 6 23 60
FP 13 207 4
TN 0 0 640
FN 68 56 8
Table 8  Confusion matrix for "AFL Matches Happening"
Category Single keyword  Keyword + WordNet Equivalents LUEI framework
TP 2 5 24
FP 8 14 2
TN 0 0 29
FN 24 21 2


[Page 18]
272 The Review of Socionetwork Strategies (2024) 18:255–278
• TN: This measure shows the number of news articles a model has recommended 
as irrelevant to the CE’s name and that both experts have confirmed the news as 
irrelevant. In the first two categories of experiments (using "Single Keyword" or 
"Keyword + WordNet Equivalent"), this measure is always zero. This is because 
as we are using Google News for our search, it will only show us articles that it 
considers relevant, without any label. This is not the case in the third model that 
labels the news as relevant or irrelevant.
• FN: This measure shows the number of news articles that a model has not rec-
ommended as relevant to the CE’s name but has been confirmed by both experts 
as relevant. For the first two categories of experiments (using "Single Keyword" 
or "Keyword + WordNet Equivalent"), this measure shows the number of news 
articles that were not shown by these methods as relevant but were marked as 
relevant by the third experiment and confirmed by both the experts. For the third 
experiment, this measure shows the number of news articles incorrectly labelled 
as non-relevant but marked as relevant by both experts. This also considers news 
articles shown as relevant in the first two experiments and confirmed by the 
experts but not shown as relevant in the third experiment.
Tables  11, 12, 13 and 14 show the evaluation metrics for each experiment. The 
results show that the proposed approach performs significantly better than only 
using the CE’s name as the search keyword and/or the CE’s name + synonyms. This 
is because the proposed approach, apart from just using the CE’s name, expands 
its search scope by also using relevant terms. The number of FNs in the first and 
the second experiments (Tables  7, 8, 9 and 10) demonstrates this. Another advan-
tage of the proposed approach is that it only shows news articles relevant to the CE. 
For example, as the CE’s name is "increase in COVID cases", the first and second 
experiments show many news articles with COVID in them but do not specifically 
Table 9  Confusion matrix for "Airport Staff Shortage"
Category Single keyword  Keyword + WordNet Equivalents LUEI framework
TP 4 7 11
FP 9 11 2
TN 0 0 25
FN 8 5 1
Table 10  Confusion matrix for "Construction Workers Hold Strike"
Category Single keyword  Keyword + WordNet Equivalents LUEI framework
TP 3 6 20
FP 10 23 7
TN 0 0 28
FN 17 14 0


[Page 19]
273
The Review of Socionetwork Strategies (2024) 18:255–278 
Table 11  Evaluation metrics for different approaches for the event "Increase in COVID Cases"
Performance metric Single keyword  Keyword + WordNet 
equivalents
LUEI framework
Accuracy 6.89% 8.04% 98.31%
Precision 31.75% 10% 93.75%
Recall 8.10% 29.11% 88.23%
F1 Score 12.90% 14.88% 90.90%
relate to an increase in COVID cases. This is shown in the number of FPs they have. 
The LUEI framework avoids this by only showing articles related to an increase 
in COVID cases, as shown by the number of FPs and TNs in its analysis. In other 
words, the proposed approach does not show a news article if it merely has the name 
of the CE. Hence, it has a higher accuracy, precision, recall and F1 score in deter -
mining the occurrence of the CE in the news articles. Tables  15 and 16 show the 
total confusion matrix and evaluation metrics for all the experiments.
Table 12  Evaluation Metrics for Different Approaches for the Event "AFL Matches Happening"
Performance Metric Single Keyword  Keyword + WordNet 
Equivalents
LUEI framework
Accuracy 5.88% 12.5% 92.98%
Precision 20% 26.32% 92.31%
Recall 7.69% 19.23% 92.31%
F1 Score 11.11% 22.22 % 92.31%
Table 13  Evaluation metrics for different approaches for the event "Airport Staff Shortage"
Performance metric Single keyword  Keyword + WordNet 
Equivalents
LUEI framework
Accuracy 19.05% 30.43% 92.31%
Precision 30.77% 38.89% 84.62%
Recall 33.33% 58.33% 91.67%
F1 Score 32% 46.67% 88.0%
Table 14  Evaluation metrics for different approaches for the event "Construction Workers Hold Strike"
Performance metric Single keyword  Keyword + WordNet 
Equivalents
LUEI framework
Accuracy 10% 13.95% 82.27%
Precision 23.08% 20.69% 74.04%
Recall 15 % 30% 100%
F1 Score 18.18 % 24.49 % 85.11%


[Page 20]
274 The Review of Socionetwork Strategies (2024) 18:255–278
In the second approach of evaluation we demonstrate the superiority of the 
proposed LUEI framework, by  comparing its results with that of EventRegis-
try [13], and Aylien (https:// aylien. com/). We used each of the three models to 
determine the relevant news articles to the CE "increase in COVID cases" for 
a period of one day. EventRegistry returned 100 news articles, which was later 
reduced to 54 after deleting the duplicates. Aylien returned 839 news articles 
in total, whereas the LUEI framework, which used all seed phrases related to 
"increase in Covid cases" rather than just the phrase for finding the relevant 
news, returned 71 news articles. To determine the accuracy of the results, we 
asked experts to read the results from each approach and tag them based on their 
relevance to the "increase in COVID cases" or if they confirm that this event is 
happening. An article recognised by the experts as relevant to the CE was tagged 
as "true positive" (TP), whereas an irrelevant article was tagged as "false posi-
tive" (FP). Furthermore, if an article was identified as relevant by one framework 
and confirmed by the experts as a TP but did not appear in the output of another 
framework, it was tagged as a "false negative" (FN) for the latter. So, in other 
words, a news article that was not ranked as TP by a method but was confirmed 
Table 15  Total confusion matrix
Category Single keyword  Keyword + WordNet equivalents LUEI framework
TP 15 41 115
FP 40 255 15
TN 0 0 722
FN 117 96 11
Table 16  Total evaluation metrics
Performance Metric Single Keyword  Keyword + WordNet 
Equivalents
LUEI framework
Accuracy 8.72% 10.46% 98.31%
Precision 27.27% 13.85% 93.75%
Recall 11.36% 29.93% 88.23%
F1 Score 16.04% 18.94% 90.90%
Table 17  Confusion matrix for different methods for the event "Increase in Covid Cases"
Category LUEI  EventRegistery Aylien
TP 15 6 4
FP 0 48 835
TN 53 0 0
FN 8 13 17


[Page 21]
275
The Review of Socionetwork Strategies (2024) 18:255–278 
as a TP by the other methods was considered an FN for the former. As the LUEI 
framework categorizes news articles as relevant and irrelevant, they also have 
true negatives (TN) or false negatives (FN). However, this was not the case with 
the other two frameworks. Tables  17 and 18 presents the evaluation results. The 
results show that EventRegistry and Aylien generate significant noise as they 
return any news containing any part of the CE. When we attempted to search 
for the CE using double quotation marks, both frameworks returned only one 
result, which was also irrelevant. This was not the case with the proposed LUEI 
framework. It identified the occurrence of the CE with minimal steps in a large 
dataset by following its lightweight and unsupervised approach. The working of 
LUEI framework approach is versatile and not restricted to a particular domain 
as it is not trained on data from a specific field. Furthermore, it doesn’t require 
an annotated dataset, and the risk manager only needs to input the CE’s name for 
the framework to determine whether the event is occurring.
6  Efficacy of the LUEI Framework in Answering the Competency 
Question
This section demonstrates the effectiveness of the LUEI framework in detecting 
real-world events, aligning with the competency questions outlined in Sect.  1.1 
as follows:
1-How does the LUEI framework identify the seed phrases related to a 
CE? The efficacy of the LUEI framework in aggregating seed phrases for each 
event, derived from news analysis, is substantiated by Tables  3 through 6 . This 
approach enables the LUEI framework to broaden its search scope when mining 
news data. The augmentation of these seed phrases in search queries, as evi-
denced by Tables  7, 8, 9 and 10, significantly enhances the volume of the related 
news captured. This enhancement is essential in accurately detecting real-world 
events.
2- How effective is the LUEI framework in identifying the occurrences of 
an event in the real world by monitoring and analyzing news articles? Tables 
11–18 present a comparative analysis, demonstrating the high efficiency of the 
LUEI framework in news labelling after using seed phrases. When compared 
to manual methods that employ either a single keyword or a combination of a 
Table 18  Evaluation metrics for different methods for the event "increase in Covid cases"
Performance metric LUEI  EventRegistery Aylien
Accuracy 89.47% 8.96% 0.47%
Precision 100% 11.11% 0.48%
Recall 65.22% 31.58% 19.05%
F1 Score 78.95% 16.44% 0.91%


[Page 22]
276 The Review of Socionetwork Strategies (2024) 18:255–278
keyword and its synonyms, or compared against other approaches like Even-
tRegistery or Aylien, the LUEI framework’s output closely mirrors expert opin-
ions. This alignment with expert analysis underscores the primary objective of 
this research: to develop a system that can reliably and accurately identify real-
world events with no training data available for these events.
7  Conclusion and Future Work
In this paper, we proposed the LUEI framework to identify the occurrence of events 
of interest. As opposed to existing models, LUEI is a lightweight and unsupervised 
approach that, without any training data, recommends news articles that are relevant 
to the search term of interest to the risk manager. As previously discussed, the LUEI 
framework is a part of the CERIA framework that quantifies the chance of the occur-
rence of risk events in supply chains by finding out the cause-and-effect relationship 
between the events that can lead to the occurrence of those risk events. In future 
work, we will develop an approach to model the cause-and-effect network of the 
risk events and analyze the daily news to quantify the probability of the occurrence 
of the risk event. We will also extend our experiments to demonstrate our proposed 
framework’s effectiveness.
Acknowledgements The first author acknowledges the financial support received from The University of 
New South Wales, Australia for this work.
Funding Open Access funding enabled and organized by CAUL and its Member Institutions.
Data availability The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding 
author upon reasonable request.
Declarations 
Conflict of interest On behalf of all authors, the corresponding author states that there is no Conflict of 
interest.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, 
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long 
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative 
Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this 
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line 
to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended 
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permis-
sion directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/.
References
 1. Fan, Y., & Stevenson, M. (2018). A review of supply chain risk management: Definition, theory, and 
research agenda. International Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics Management, 48, 205–230.
 2. Zsidisin*, G., Melnyk, S. & Ragatz, G. (2005). An institutional theory perspective of business continuity 
planning for purchasing and supply management. International Journal of Production Research., 43, 
3401–3420.


[Page 23]
277
The Review of Socionetwork Strategies (2024) 18:255–278 
 3. Peck, H. (2005). Drivers of supply chain vulnerability: An integrated framework. International Journal of 
Physical Distribution & Logistics Management., 35, 210–232.
 4. Deiva Ganesh, A., & Kalpana, P. (2022). Supply chain risk identification: A real-time data-mining 
approach. Industrial Management & Data Systems., 122, 1333–1354.
 5. Aboutorab, H., Hussain, O., Saberi, M., & Hussain, F. (2022). A reinforcement learning-based framework 
for disruption risk identification in supply chains. Future Generation Computer Systems, 126, 110–122.
 6. Kumar, S. & Sharma, S. (2023). Integrated Model for Predicting Supply Chain Risk Through Machine 
Learning Algorithms. International Journal Of Mathematical, Engineering & Management Sciences, 
8.
 7. Wong, L., Tan, G., Ooi, K., Lin, B., & Dwivedi, Y. (2022). Artificial intelligence-driven risk management 
for enhancing supply chain agility: A deep-learning-based dual-stage PLS-SEM-ANN analysis. Inter-
national Journal Of Production Research. pp. 1–21.
 8. Xu, Z., Ni, W., Liu, S., Wang, F., & Li, J. (2023). Logistics Supply Chain Network Risk Prediction Model 
Based on Intelligent Random Forest Model. IEEE Transactions On Engineering Management.
 9. Dong, Y., Xie, K., Bohan, Z., & Lin, L. (2021). A machine learning model for product fraud detection 
based on svm. 2021 2nd International Conference On Education, Knowledge And Information Man-
agement (ICEKIM). pp. 385-388
 10. Cohen, M., & Kunreuther, H. (2007). Operations risk management: Overview of Paul Kleindorfer’s 
contributions. Production And Operations Management., 16, 525–541.
 11. Chapman, P., Christopher, M., Jüttner, U., Peck, H., & Wilding, R. (2002). Identifying and managing 
supply chain vulnerability. Logistics And Transport Focus, 4.
 12. Xiang, W., & Wang, B. (2019). A survey of event extraction from text. IEEE Access., 7, 
173111–173137.
 13. Leban, G., Fortuna, B., Brank, J., & Grobelnik, M. (2014). Event registry: learning about world events 
from news. Proceedings Of The 23rd International Conference On World Wide Web. pp. 107-110.
 14. Chen, Y., Xu, L., Liu, K., Zeng, D., & Zhao, J. (2015). Event Extraction via Dynamic Multi-Pooling 
Convolutional Neural Networks. Proceedings Of The 53rd Annual Meeting Of The Association For 
Computational Linguistics And The 7th International Joint Conference On Natural Language Process-
ing (Volume 1: Long Papers). pp. 167–176.
 15. Yang, S., Feng, D., Qiao, L., Kan, Z., & Li, D. (2019,7). Exploring Pre-trained Language Models for 
Event Extraction and Generation. Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics. pp. 5284–5294.
 16. Zhang, Y., Xu, G., Wang, Y., Liang, X., Wang, L., & Huang, T. (2019). Empower event detection with 
bi-directional neural language model. Knowledge-Based Systems, 167, 87–97.
 17. Han, S., Huang, H., & Liu, J. (2021). Neural news recommendation with event extraction. ArXiv Pre-
print arXiv: 2111. 05068.
 18. Zhukov, D., Andrianova, E., & Trifonova, O. (2021). Stochastic diffusion model for analysis of dynam-
ics and forecasting events in news feeds. Symmetry., 13, 257.
 19. Bhokar, P., Sonawane, A., Sonawane, S., & Joshi, H. (2023). Detection and Classification of Financial 
Events from News Articles.
 20. Goyal, P., Kaushik, P., Gupta, P., Vashisth, D., Agarwal, S., & Goyal, N. (2019). Multilevel event detec-
tion, storyline generation, and summarization for tweet streams. IEEE Transactions On Computational 
Social Systems., 7, 8–23.
 21. Akbari, M., Hu, X., Liqiang, N., & Chua, T. (2016). From Tweets to Wellness: Wellness Event Detec-
tion from Twitter Streams. Proceedings Of The Thirtieth AAAI frameworkI Conference On Artificial 
Intelligence. pp. 87–93.
 22. Rahimizadeh, P., & Shayegan, M. (2022). Event Detection in Twitter by Weighting Tweet’s Features. 
2022 8th International Conference On Web Research (ICWR). pp. 203–209.
 23. Kaleel, S., & Abhari, A. (2015). Cluster-discovery of Twitter messages for event detection and trending. 
Journal of Computational Science, 6, 47–57.
 24. Newton, A. (2010). Use of a Bayesian network for Red Listing under uncertainty. Environmental Mod-
elling & Software., 25, 15–23.
 25. Hamilton, S., & Pollino, C. (2012). Good practice in Bayesian network modelling. Environmental Mod-
elling & Software, 37.
 26. Kasneci, E., Seßler, K., Küchemann, S., Bannert, M., Dementieva, D., Fischer, F., Gasser, U., Groh, G., 
Günnemann, S., Hüllermeier, E., Krusche, S., Kutyniok, G., Michaeli, T., Nerdel, C., Pfeffer, J., Poquet, 
O., Sailer, M., Schmidt, A., Seidel, T., & Kasneci, G. (2023). ChatGPT for Good? On Opportunities 
and Challenges of Large Language Models for Education.


[Page 24]
278 The Review of Socionetwork Strategies (2024) 18:255–278
 27. Shahsavari, M., Hussain, O., & Saberi, M., & Sharma, P. (2024). Empowering Supply chains Resil-
ience: LLMs-Powered BN for Proactive Supply Chain Risk Identification.
 28. Reimers, N., & Gurevych, I. (2019). Sentence-BERT: Sentence Embeddings using Siamese BERT-Net-
works. Proceedings Of The 2019 Conference On Empirical Methods In Natural Language Processing.
 29. Grootendorst, M. (2020). KeyBERT: Minimal keyword extraction with BERT. (Zenodo).
 30. Shahsavari, M., Hussain, O., Saberi, M., & Sharma, P. (2023). A lightweight and unsupervised 
approach for identifying risk events in news articles. 2023 IEEE International Conference On Data 
Mining Workshops (ICDMW). pp. 37-43.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.