[Page 1]
FINANCE BENCH : A New Benchmark for Financial Question Answering
Pranab Islam1∗ Anand Kannappan1 Douwe Kiela2,3
Rebecca Qian1 Nino Scherrer1 Bertie Vidgen1
1 Patronus AI 2 Contextual AI 3 Stanford University
Abstract
FINANCE BENCH is a first-of-its-kind test suite
for evaluating the performance of LLMs on
open book financial question answering (QA).
It comprises 10,231 questions about publicly
traded companies, with corresponding an-
swers and evidence strings. The questions
in FINANCE BENCH are ecologically valid and
cover a diverse set of scenarios. They are in-
tended to be clear-cut and straightforward to
answer to serve as a minimum performance
standard. We test 16 state of the art model con-
figurations (including GPT-4-Turbo, Llama2
and Claude2, with vector stores and long con-
text prompts) on a sample of 150 cases from
FINANCE BENCH , and manually review their
answers (n=2,400). The cases are available
open-source. We show that existing LLMs
have clear limitations for financial QA. Notably,
GPT-4-Turbo used with a retrieval system in-
correctly answered or refused to answer 81%
of questions. While augmentation techniques
such as using longer context window to feed in
relevant evidence improve performance, they
are unrealistic for enterprise settings due to in-
creased latency and cannot support larger fi-
nancial documents. We find that all models
examined exhibit weaknesses, such as halluci-
nations, that limit their suitability for use by
enterprises.
1 Introduction
Finance specialists routinely need to find informa-
tion about companies and industries, summarize
and analyze that information, and then reason about
it. This time-intensive and difficult work is cru-
cial for making investment decisions, developing
financial strategies, and conducting due diligence.
Large Language Models (LLMs) have the poten-
tial to augment and automate labor-intensive parts
of financial analysis because of their impressive
capabilities in natural language understanding, rea-
soning, and writing (Nori et al., 2023; Bubeck et al.,
∗ Authors are ordered alphabetically
Figure 1: Incorrect model responses (using a shared
vector store) to a question in FINANCE BENCH . The
correct answer is given by the human expert.
2023). However, a key challenge blocking the fi-
nancial industry’s adoption of LLMs is that there
are few ways of evaluating models’ performance
on finance‘-specific tasks. And, without rigorous,
systematic, and measurable evaluation processes,
the industry cannot (1) understand the strengths
and weaknesses of models; (2) assess whether they
perform well enough to use in high-stakes live set-
tings; and (3) track how their capabilities change
over time.
The financial domain presents unique challenges
for LLMs. First, models need domain-specific
knowledge about financial topics and terminology,
as well as companies and industries. It is unclear
how much financial information and statistics ap-
pear in the pre-training data of models. In part to
address models’ lack of knowledge about finance,
BloombergGPT was released in March 2023 as
the first LLM specialised for the financial domain
(Wu et al., 2023). Second, models need up-to-date
financial information and to understand relevant
financial news. However, many models’ data is
arXiv:2311.11944v1  [cs.CL]  20 Nov 2023


[Page 2]
from several months or years before their release.
Third, financial questions often involve numerical
reasoning. This is a well-established limitation of
LLMs, which often make mistakes when asked to
make calculations (Lu et al., 2023; Imani et al.,
2023). Fourth, to answer financial questions, mod-
els need to handle both unstructured inputs (e.g.
qualitative questions in the form of free-text) and
structured inputs (such as tabular data) (Zhu et al.,
2021). Without additional training, many LLMs
are worse at handling tabular inputs than natural
language (Zha et al., 2023). Fifth, models need
to handle multiple bits of information (sometimes
from multiple documents) and parse long passages
of text. Such content is more difficult for them to
reason about than short strings taken from a single
source.
To better understand these challenges in using
LLMs for Financial QA, we introduce a new bench-
mark, FINANCE BENCH . It is created by a multi-
disciplinary team of experts in AI, evaluation, and
financial services, and it addresses an important
gap in how LLMs are evaluated in finance. In this
paper, we document the construction and compo-
sition of FINANCE BENCH , which is intended as
an open book test. We also report the performance
of 16 model configurations on FINANCE BENCH ,
which includes four state of the art models, and a
mix of settings (including a closed book, an oracle,
two vector store implementations, and a long con-
text window). We provide qualitative insights into
their performance. From the full FINANCE BENCH
dataset, we constructed a diverse sample of 150
cases for evaluation, for which experts manually
checked the answers from each of the 16 model
configurations models’ answers (n=2,400). The
150 evaluation cases are available open-source. 1
Data documentation is given in the Appendix, as
well as additional information about each of the
companies in FINANCE BENCH .
2 Prior work
Several LLMs have been developed for the finance
industry, with the release of BloombergGPT at-
tracting considerable attention in early 2023 (Wu
et al., 2023). It outperforms other LLMs on generic
reasoning benchmarks, financial benchmarks, and
proprietary Bloomberg datasets. It is a 50 bil-
lion parameter model, trained on 363 million to-
kens from a proprietary industry-specific dataset,
1https://github.com/patronus-ai/financebench
as well as 345 million tokens from generic natu-
ral language datasets (Wu et al., 2023). Follow-
ing this work, Yang et al. (2023) introduced Fin-
GPT, an open-source and data-centric model that
is trained on a large array of financial data sources.
Choi et al. (2023) created ConFIRM, an LLM-
based conversational financial information retrieval
model that is designed for financial QA. Before
the widespread adoption of ChatGPT-style LLMs,
Shah et al. (2022) introduced both a new finan-
cial language model (“FLANG”) and an evaluation
benchmark (“FLUE”), which combines several ex-
isting open source financial datasets. FLANG uses
preferential financial word and phrase masking dur-
ing training to improve performance on financial
tasks. Zhu et al. (2021) created TagOp, BERT- and
ELECTRA-based models designed to handle both
tabular and textual data. The architecture uses se-
quence tagging to extract relevant cells from table
and text spans, and symbolic reasoning to derive a
final answer.
Numerous evaluation datasets, benchmarks and
test suites have been created that test LLMs’
generic capabilities for question-answering, read-
ing comprehension, logical reasoning, and infor-
mation retrieval (Kamalloo et al., 2023; Qiao et al.,
2023; Huang and Chang, 2023). They include both
“open book” tests (where the model has access to ex-
ternal sources of information, such as a document
vector store or online sources like Wikipedia) and
“closed book” tests (where the model has access to
no additional information). Popular QA bench-
marks include SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al., 2016)
and SQuADRun (Rajpurkar et al., 2018), as well
as NarrativeQA (Ko ˇciský et al., 2018) and Hel-
laSwag (Zellers et al., 2019), which are both part
of HELM (Liang et al., 2023). However, these
datasets typically contain no financial questions
or only very few (such as TruthfulQA (Lin et al.,
2022)). And, it cannot be assumed that strong per-
formance on a generic “open domain” benchmark
generalizes to strong performance in a specific do-
main, such as financial QA (Liu et al., 2022; Niu
et al., 2023).
FiQA (Maia et al., 2018) was introduced as a
shared task to assess how models perform at in-
terpreting financial data, with a focus on aspect-
based sentiment analysis and “opinionated Ques-
tion Answering”. However, it is limited as senti-
ment analysis comprises only a small proportion of
the questions that financial analysts ask about com-


[Page 3]
Company GICS Sector Metrics-
generated
Domain-
relevant
Novel
generated Total
3M Industrials 269 25 36 330
Boeing Industrials 248 25 47 320
CVS Health Health Care 253 25 23 301
Coca-Cola Consumer Staples 239 25 25 289
MGM Resorts Consumer Discretionary 196 25 26 247
Netflix Communication Services 242 25 25 292
Pfizer Health Care 156 25 58 239
Salesforce Information Technology 0 25 25 50
Ulta Beauty Consumer Discretionary 0 25 25 50
Verizon Communication Services 272 25 50 347
Table 1: Selection of 10 companies in FINANCE BENCH
panies. FinQA (Chen et al., 2021) is a high-quality
open-source dataset of over 8,000 question and
answer pairs, written by financial experts. Chen
et al. (2022) built on FinQA with ConvFinQA, in-
troduced in 2022. Instead of stand-alone questions,
each interaction can involve several questions that
may depend on the previous questions/answers.
This is a more realistic and more complex testing
setup. ConvFinQA comprises 3,892 conversations
with 14,115 questions. Zhu et al. (2021) introduce
TAT-QA, which comprises numerical reasoning
questions with tabular and textual data, taken from
public financial reports. They used 182 financial
reports to construct 16,552 question-answer pairs.
Other benchmarks and tests have been proposed
that are finance-specific but are not solely focused
on traditional QA. Salinas Alvarado et al. (2015)
introduced a dataset for named entity recognition
of credit risk attributes in financial documents. In
2023, Callanan et al. (2023) tested whether an LLM
could answer mock exam questions for the Char-
tered Financial Analyst (CFA) Program, levels I
and II. Although the exact passing criteria for the
CFA are not available publicly, the authors estimate
that their best-performing implementations would
have a “decent chance of passing”.
Existing evaluation datasets and tests are not suf-
ficiently grounded in the day-to-day activities of
financial analysts. They do not address the type
of tasks (specifically retrieving information from
relevant documents and reasoning about it) that are
now being replaced, or substantially augmented,
by LLMs. This presents a clear risk to ecological
validity, and therefore the datasets’ usefulness as
benchmarks (de Vries et al., 2020). Therefore, it is
critical that LLMs are tested for financial QA with
an open-book setup, which involves a clear retrieval
component – rather than just giving them the infor-
mation that they need to reach the correct answer.
3 F INANCE BENCH Dataset
FINANCE BENCH is a benchmark dataset that com-
prises 10,231 questions, answers, and evidence
triplets. It covers 40 companies that are publicly
traded in the USA and 361 public filings, released
between 2015 and 2023, including 10Ks, 10Qs,
8Ks, and Earnings Reports. Each entry in FI-
NANCE BENCH includes the question itself (e.g.
“What is Boeing’s FY2022 cost of goods sold (in
USD millions)? ”), the answer (e.g. “$63,078
million”), an evidence string (which contains the
information needed to verify that the answer to
the question is correct) and a page number from
the relevant document. In some cases, annotators
provided a “Justification” which explains how they
calculated a specific number or reached a conclu-
sion. It was at their discretion to decide whether
this field was needed. Each entry also has labels for
the company name, company’s GICS sector, docu-
ment name, document year, and document type, to
enable fine-grained analyses. There are three types
of questions in FINANCE BENCH .
First, there are 25 “ domain-relevant ques-
tions”. These questions are generically relevant
to financial analysis of a publicly-traded company,
such as whether it has paid a dividend in the
last year, or whether operating margins are
consistent throughout multiple financial periods.
The questions were developed with our team
of financial analysts and refined by reviewing
companies’ public findings (e.g. 10Ks) and
interviewing financial experts. In some cases,
the questions were not relevant to the company,
such as asking about inventory for a technology
company or gross margins for a financial services
company. In these cases, annotators stated this
and gave a brief explanation. The domain-relevant
questions were posed for 37 of the 40 companies
in FINANCE BENCH , contributing 925 entries.


[Page 4]
Second, we tasked annotators with creating new
questions. They are each specific to the company,
the report, and the industry, which we call “novel
generated questions”. Annotators were directed
to use their knowledge and experience to ask ques-
tions that are realistic (in the sense that they re-
late to important information a financial analyst
would want to know); varied (in the sense that they
should utilize different parts of the reports, cover
different topics, and are phrased differently); and
challenging (in the sense that they should not be
purely extractive but, instead, involve reasoning).
We emphasized ecological validity at all times as
we did not want to create a dataset that contains
“challenging” questions which would not be asked
in a real-world setting. The novel generated ques-
tions were posed to 37 of the 40 companies in
FINANCE BENCH . There are between 15 and 80
questions for each company, with an average of 36
questions. 1,323 novel generated questions were
created in total.
Third, we created “ metrics-generated ques-
tions”. These are critically important given that a
core part of financial analysts’ work is to compute
metrics and then reason about them. Annotators
extracted 18 specific metrics ("base metrics") from
the three main financial statements in 10Ks (in-
come statement, balance sheet, and cash flow state-
ment), from a period of 8 years (2015-2022). These
metrics are mostly standard metrics that many com-
panies report. The base metrics were extracted
only if they could be computed using information
only within a single financial statement. In other
words, if one or more line items within the financial
statement clearly represented the metric in question
we added the metric into our base metric set. We
typically collected 14 metrics per filing as some
metrics were either unavailable or ambiguous. The
base metrics were then used programmatically to
construct a series of derivative metrics (metrics
whose values are derived from the base metrics).
For example, net income margin is derived from
the two base metrics: (1) net income and (2) total
revenue. We then constructed questions and an-
swers from both the base and the derivative metrics,
using templates that were specific to each combina-
tion of metric, company, fiscal year, and financial
statement(s). In some cases, the questions were
purely extractive (e.g. “What is the FY2019 un-
adjusted operating income (as reported by man-
agement) for Amazon?”) and in other cases they
involved additional calculations, involving either
one or multiple financial statements (e.g. “what is
PepsiCo’s FY2021 total D&A (as shown in cash
flow statement) as a percent of total revenue?”).
To ensure that the metrics-generated questions are
realistic and varied, the question templates intro-
duced phrasing variations for each of the questions.
See details in the Appendix. The metrics-generated
questions were posed to 32 of the 40 companies in
FINANCE BENCH . There are between 135 and 348
questions for each company, with an average of
249 questions. 7,983 metrics-generated questions
were created in total.
3.1 Taxonomy of financial questions
We developed a taxonomy of financial questions,
based on taxonomies in prior work (Rogers et al.,
2023) and adapted for the financial services domain.
We created the taxonomy to better understand the
strengths and weaknesses of AI QA tools when
addressing different types of questions. There are
three types of questions in the taxonomy. Infor-
mation extraction refers to extracting specific data
or textual content from the filings. Note that the
other three types always involve some degree of
extraction in order to have the information for rea-
soning. Numerical reasoning refers to performing
mathematical calculations or comparing numerical
data. Logical reasoning refers to using logical de-
ductions to evaluate, contrast, or make judgments
regarding the information in the filings. It includes
qualitatively assessing information about the com-
pany and assessing numerical calculations, such as
evaluating computed values. We applied the ques-
tions taxonomy to all of the domain-relevant ques-
tions and the metrics-generated questions (total n
= 8,908). 2,493 questions solely involve extracting
information (28%), 5,897 questions involve numer-
ical reasoning (66%), and 518 (6%) involve logical
reasoning. For the metrics-generated questions that
involve numerical reasoning (n=5,786), we created
a secondary taxonomy label for whether they (1)
can be answered with a single financial statement
or (2) require multiple financial statements to an-
swer. Taxonomy labels are available for the 150
cases in open-source evaluation set.
3.2 Dataset labelling and quality control
A team of 20 annotators were recruited for FI-
NANCE BENCH . To join the project, annotators
needed to have relevant experience and education
in finance, complete a short screening test, and dis-


[Page 5]
cuss the project with the authors. Many were trea-
sury analysts, finance MBAs, and junior analysts.
Analysts were trained and given access to onboard-
ing and guidance documentation. During the early
stages of the project, after training had been com-
pleted, five annotators left the project due to quality
issues and their annotations were discarded. 13 an-
notators contributed between 19 and 369 of the
domain-relevant and novel generated questions. 2
annotators solely extracted metrics for the metrics-
generated questions. They each extracted just over
2,300 metrics, which we used to create 7,983 ques-
tions. A senior analyst organized, reviewed and
gave feedback on the work of the 15 analysts. This
analyst has extensive experience in both finance
and machine learning, and understood the goals
and requirements of the project. The project was
run over several weeks, with work issued incre-
mentally as annotators’ confidence and experience
increased. Each week, approximately 20-25 cases
were checked for each annotator (around 10-20%).
Errors were corrected and feedback given to each
annotator. In the final stages of the project, we
worked with only four annotators who had demon-
strated a strong understanding of the task and the
quality expectations. At the end of the project, ap-
proximately 10% of the domain-relevant and novel
generated questions were reviewed and adjustments
made to fix quality issues. Our analysis of the evalu-
ation samples (see below) indicates that overall the
dataset is robust, ecologically valid, and accurate.
3.3 Dataset for human eval (n=150)
We created a dataset of 150 cases for human eval-
uation. It comprises 50 cases from the domain-
relevant questions (stratified so there are an equal
number of cases from each of the 25 unique ques-
tions), 50 randomly sampled novel-generated ques-
tions, and 50 randomly sampled metrics-generated
questions. We sampled evenly from the three types
of questions in FINANCE BENCH , despite their dif-
ferent overall volumes, to create a diverse sample
that enables fine-grained analysis of model capa-
bilities. This is informed by recent work on the
limitations of random sampling for constructing
evaluation datasets (Vivek et al., 2023). We did not
stratify the sample by company, year, or industry.
4 Experimental Setup
We test four LLMs, from three model providers:
OpenAI’s GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023) and GPT-4-
Turbo with a 128k context window2; Anthropic’s
Claude2 with a 100k context window(Bai et al.,
2022); and Meta’s Llama2 (Touvron et al., 2023).
We use Llama2 as it is one of the highest-
performing open-source models available. The
LLMs are tested across five setups and two prompt
orders (described below) which, because we do
not cross every LLM with every setup and prompt
format, results in 16 distinct configurations. The
configurations test either an important (albeit arti-
ficial) LLM implementation (i.e. the Closed book
and the Oracle settings) or an implementation that
reflects how LLMs are being adopted in industry
for Financial QA. The prompt templates are de-
scribed in the Appendix.
Closed book For GPT-4 and GPT-4-Turbo, we
test a closed book setting. Each prompt is fed to
the model without any additional information or
context.3 This is the most naive implementation of
an LLM for financial QA.
Oracle We also test an unrealistic Oracle setting
for both GPT-4 and GPT-4-Turbo. In this setting,
the model is given the prompt as well as the text
from the page used to evidence the answer (as
recorded by the annotators during dataset creation).
In principle, all of the information that it needs
to answer the question. This turns the task into
“open book” question answering by removing the
retrieval challenge, which makes it both unrealis-
tic and substantially easier. For all non metrics-
generated questions, we used the entire page text
from the same page(s) as the evidence texts that an-
notators labelled (therefore the model had full page
context around the specific evidence text that anno-
tators chose to answer the question at hand). We
added the relevant page(s) to each prompt before
feeding it to the model. For the metrics-generated
questions, we provided the relevant financial state-
ment(s) from the document needed to calculate the
metric, such as the cash flow statement and / or
income statement. We present these results solely
as a reference study.
Single vector store We create a simple retrieval
baseline by initializing a single vector store per
document. While this is unrealistic in production
2https://platform.openai.com/docs/models/
gpt-4-and-gpt-4-turbo
3During our early testing, we compared GPT-4 against
GPT-3.5. GPT3.5’s performance was similar but slightly
worse. Due to this, we decided not to continue testing GPT-3.5
further.


[Page 6]
settings, we construct this as a naive baseline. Vec-
tor stores enable models to quickly access, and
use, relevant information for a given task, and have
been proposed as a way of making AI models more
factually- and contextually- grounded (Lewis et al.,
2020). A single vector store setup is slower to run
as we have to construct a new vector store each
time, and is arguably unrealistic in a live industry
setting where thousands of documents are avail-
able for use. However, it means the vector store
has a much smaller range of documents to search
over and so should perform better. We test GPT-4,
GPT-4-Turbo, and Llama2 with the single vector
store.
Shared vector store We construct a more realis-
tic setting by creating a shared vector store for all
documents. We use the same Chroma database,
Langchain implementation and OpenAI embed-
dings as for the single vector store. Our vec-
tor store is implemented in Langchain 4, using a
Chroma database5 and OpenAI embeddings (text-
embedding-ada-002). The vector store indexes
over all of the 360 documents that appear in Fi-
nanceBench. We test GPT-4, GPT-4-Turbo, and
Llama2 with the shared vector store.
Long context GPT-4-Turbo and Claude2 are ca-
pable of handling long context windows (128k and
100k tokens, respectively). The public filing that
the question relates to is added to the prompt and
then fed in to the model. This removes the need
for a vector store, and offers a flexible way of han-
dling documents. In some cases, the long context
window is still not sufficient to handle the public
filing (which can run to 250 pages). For these cases,
we truncated the document to the first 95,000 to
100,000 tokens. This choice is partly justified by
the fact that nearly all questions relate to the ear-
lier parts of the documents. Also note that long
context windows today are not only too small to
support documents typically used by financial ana-
lysts, such LLMs are also much slower and more
expensive to use. Therefore, they are not typically
used in a production setting today.
Prompt order: Relative position of question and
context For all setups that involve passing the
model relevant information (i.e. every setting apart
from the closed book), the order of the prompt
and the evidence string can be swapped round; the
4https://www.langchain.com/
5https://www.trychroma.com/
prompt can go before or after the evidence. This
can make a substantial difference to how models
perform, especially with longer evidence strings.
We refer to these two prompt schemes as Context-
First or Context-Last. We test both the GPT-4 and
GPT-4-Turbo on oracle settings, and the GPT-4-
Turbo and Claude2 on long context settings with
both prompt schemes.
4.1 Labelling LLM Responses
Each of the models’ responses to the 150 ques-
tions have been labelled by one of the research
team. Complex cases were raised for discussion,
and samples from every models’ responses were
spot-checked. Models’ responses were each as-
signed to one of three categories. First, correct
answer. This is the ‘desired’ behavior of models.
To ensure a good-faith understanding of models’ ca-
pabilities we allow minor deviations, such as giving
the answer in billions when the unit was given in
the question as millions. We also allow very small
rounding errors. Second, incorrect answer. In-
correct answers vary, from calculations that are off
by small margins to several orders of magnitude,
and from making up legal information to giving
the wrong direction for an effect (e.g. reporting
negative growth when it is actually positive).
If a model gives the right answer but with logic
or calculations that explicitly contradict the evi-
dence in the gold standard answer, we label it In-
correct. Third, failure to answer . If the model
explicitly states that it cannot answer because it
does not have access to the right information then
it is a failure to answer (e.g. “As an AI, I don’t
have real-time data access capabilities to provide
information on Boeing’s production rate forecast
for FY2023.”).
5 Results on F INANCE BENCH
Overall performance Without access to addi-
tional information (i.e. in a closed book configura-
tion), models perform poorly on FINANCE BENCH .
GPT-4-Turbo (Closed Book) only gives correct an-
swers to 9% of prompts 6. Augmentation tech-
niques, such as incorporating public filings in a
long-context window and using a vector store, vary
in how effective they are, depending partly on how
they are implemented (see Figure 3), with success
6 While we have evaluated GPT-4 and GPT-4-Turbo, we
only show the better performing model GPT-4-Turbo in the
main text. A detailed comparison is provided in the Appendix.


[Page 7]
Model Configuration Correct answer Incorrect answer Failed to answer Total
GPT-4-Turbo Closed Book 14 (9%) 5 (3%) 126 (88%) 150(on its own)
Llama2 Shared Vector Store 29 (19%) 104 (70%) 17 (11%) 150(one store for all filings)
GPT-4-Turbo Shared Vector Store 29 (19%) 20 (13%) 101 (68%) 150(one store for all filings)
Llama2 Single Vector Store 62 (41%) 81 (54%) 7 (5%) 150(one store for each filing)
GPT-4-Turbo Single Vector Store 75 (50%) 17 (11%) 58 (39%) 150(one store for each filing)
Claude2 Long Context 114 (76%) 32 (21%) 4 (3%) 150(filing in context)
GPT-4-Turbo Long Context 118 (79%) 26 (17%) 6 (4%) 150(filing in context)
GPT-4-Turbo Oracle 128 (85%) 22 (15%) 0 (0%) 150(access to evidence pages)
Total 569 (47%) 307 (26%) 324 (27%) 1200
Table 2: Model performance of 8 model configurations on FINANCE BENCH human eval sample (n=150).
rates from 20% to 78%. A correct answer is con-
sidered a success. The Oracle (GPT-4-Turbo with
evidence pages) is 85% successful. As anticipated,
the configuration of GPT-4-Turbo with one vector
store for each document had a higher success rate
than the configuration with a single vector store
for all documents (50% vs 19%). We observe the
same trend for Llama2 (41% vs 19%). However,
the models exhibited different weaknesses. Llama2
had a much higher percentage of incorrect answers
(70% and 54%) rather than failing to answer (11%
and 5%) whereas the equivalent GPT-4-Turbo had
far more failure to answers (67% and 38%) than
incorrect answers (13% and 11%).
Anthropic’s Claude-2 with long-context success
rate is 76% and OpenAI’s GPT-4-Turbo with long
context is 79%. Like the Llama2 vector-store con-
figuration, these two models had far more incorrect
answers (21% and 17%) than refusals (3% and
4%). In an industry setting, the high proportion
of failures which are incorrect answers rather than
refusals could be still concerning as it indicates
a greater risk of hallucinations. Models refusing
to answer is arguably preferable to giving an in-
correct answer as it creates less risk of error, and
misplaced trust, by users. Overall, these findings in-
dicate that (1) access to the right information (i.e. a
vector store or similar) and (2) correct information
retrieval is critical for models to perform well at
financial QA. However, once the right information
has been extracted, they still need to reason cor-
rectly – and models still demonstrate weaknesses
in this regard.
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
% of Evaluation Data
Claude2 (LongContext)
GPT4 Turbo (LongContext)
GPT4 Turbo (Oracle)
Correct answer Incorrect answer Failure to answer
(i) Context-First Prompting Scheme (Default)
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
% of Evaluation Data
Claude2 (LongContext*)
GPT4 Turbo (LongContext*)
GPT4 Turbo (Oracle*)
(ii) Context-Last Prompting Scheme
Figure 2: Ablation study of different prompting
schemes on FINANCE BENCH human eval sample
(n=150). Showing the relevant context (i.e., filing or
evidence extract) before the question leads to significant
performance improvements over showing the context
after the question.
Performance by question type Models’ perfor-
mance varies across the three types of questions in
FINANCE BENCH (see Figure 4. Models typically
perform worst on the metrics-generated questions,
apart from the long context setting where Claude2
performs second best and GPT-4-Turbo performs
the best. This suggests that part of the challenge
with metrics-generated questions is retrieving the


[Page 8]
GPT4 Turbo 
(Closed Book)
Llama2 
(Shared Store)
GPT4 Turbo 
(Shared Store)
Llama2 
(Single Store)
GPT4 Turbo 
(Single Store)
Claude2 
(LongContext)
GPT4 Turbo 
(LongContext)
GPT4 Turbo 
(Oracle)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0% of Evaluation Data
Correct answer Incorrect answer Failure to answer
Figure 3: Performance of 8 model configurations on FINANCE BENCH human eval sample (n=150). The Oracle
setting and the Closed Book setting are highlighted in red as these represent unrealistic evaluation scenarios that
only serve as reference points.
correct information. We reviewed the evaluation
dataset in-depth, and many of the freely generated
questions only involve extraction. It is therefore
unsurprising that models perform better on these
questions. Equally, many of the domain-relevant
could be answered by using general world knowl-
edge. For instance, they cover what industry a
company operates in and what their main services
and products are. In contrast, many of the metrics-
generated questions involve more complex numeric
reasoning and require using multiple passages from
the documents.
Performance by prompt order The relative or-
der of the relevant context and the question of inter-
est has a clear impact on the models performances
in the LongContext setting (see Figure 2). Present-
ing the relevant filing first and then appending the
question of interest (Context-First scheme) leads to
significantly improved sucess rates for both GPT-
4-Turbo (78% vs. 25%) and Claude2 (76% vs.
37%) in the LongContext setting. Surprisingly, we
cannot observe the same trend in the Oracle set-
ting where the provided context is of significantly
shorter length as it is only of the form of an evi-
dence extract (e.g., one to few pages). The reversed
prompt order (i.e., Context-Last) leads to slightly
better performance (89% vs. 85%) in this setting.
We hypothesize that the strong performance differ-
ence in the LongContext setting stems from models
loosing track of the question of interest after seeing
thousands of evidence tokens in the in the Context-
Last prompting scheme.
5.1 Qualitative analysis of responses
As well as labelling the models’ responses to the
150 evaluation cases with the three labels (Correct
answer, Incorrect answer, and Refusal to Answer),
we also qualitatively analyze models’ responses to
identify patterns and themes. We grouped them
together into the following five themes.
High-quality correct answers In some cases,
models gave high-quality, fully-evidenced, and
fully comprehensible correct answers, which are
more useful and informative than the gold standard
answers. This includes providing multiple bits of
evidence, calculating both absolute and percent-
age differences, and clearly explaining each step
of a calculation. When correct, the responses from
Anthropic’s Claude-2 and OpenAI’s GPT-4-Turbo
long-context window setup were often particularly
high-quality.
Different but valid correct answers Some an-
swers are substantively different to the gold stan-
dard answers, but still valid. This is often the case
with more qualitative assessments, where models
provide a reasonable and informative explanation
which differs from the gold standard. In some
cases, the test cases do not specify units or the
type of evidence that is needed (e.g. for cases that
involve assessing whether a company is “capital-
intensive”). This leads to ambiguity where several
different bits of evidence could be given to substan-
tiate a position. To ensure a good-faith assessment
of models’ answers, we consider different but valid
answers to be correct.
Hallucinations In many cases, models gave su-
perficially coherent and seemingly well-justified
answers, sometimes with extensive calculations
and reasoning steps, which were still wrong. We
consider these as “hallucinations” because they are
a response where the generated output is unfaith-


[Page 9]
GPT4 Turbo 
(Closed Book)
Llama2 
(Shared Store)
GPT4 Turbo 
(Shared Store)
Llama2 
(Single Store)
GPT4 Turbo 
(Single Store)
Claude2 
(LongContext)
GPT4 Turbo 
(LongContext)
GPT4 Turbo 
(Oracle)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8Success Rate (%)
Domain-relevant questions Novel generated questions Metrics-generated questions
Figure 4: Performance of eight model configurations on FINANCE BENCH human eval sample (n=150) by type
of question. The Oracle setting and the Closed Book setting are highlighted in red as these represent unrealistic
evaluation scenarios that only serve as reference points.
ful to the given source (?). These are particularly
concerning as they are harder to catch.The Llama2
configurations are more likely to give plausible but
incorrect answers than the GPT-4-Turbo configu-
rations, as evidenced by the higher percentage of
responses that are an Incorrect answer than a Fail-
ure to answer.
Helpful refusals In some cases, particularly for
the closed book setting and the vector-store setups,
models refuse to answer the test case but still ex-
plain how it could be answered, such as by giving
advice on where to find relevant information. Mod-
els would also provide general information about
the company, the metric, or financial analysis in
general. This is a useful response, but technically
still a failure.
Irrelevant comments In some cases, models’ re-
sponses did not address the question. This indicates
that they do not properly understand the task, and
there is a large element of “guessing”.
6 Limitations of F INANCE BENCH
Single-turn conversations FINANCE BENCH
contains only single questions and answers.
However, financial analysts often ask a stream
of questions within a single conversation so they
can dig deeper into a single industry, company,
or topic. They also ask questions dynamically;
adjusting questions if the model gives an inade-
quate response or, alternatively, asking additional
questions if the response is high-quality and it
spurs followups, such as explaining a metric
or providing more information. Nonetheless,
the primary usecase, and biggest priority, is for
LLMs to provide high-quality responses to single
questions.
Public filings 10Ks, 10Qs, 8Ks, and Public earn-
ings reports are key documents used by financial
analysts to assess companies and industries, and
to make decisions. However, some analysts also
use documents that are not in the public domain.
This is particularly common with venture capital,
where companies are typically not publicly listed.
We focused on only public filings because private
documents create issues around commercial sen-
sitivity and privacy. Equally, another limitation
of FINANCE BENCH is that it only contains publi-
cally listed companies, which necessarily biases
the dataset towards larger companies and properly-
audited and well-written documents.
Lack of cross-company comparisons FI-
NANCE BENCH was designed to answer questions
about a single company, rather than to compare
figures between two companies. This is partly
because our interviews showed that analysts
primarily ask companies about single companies;
and partly because comparing two companies
means that models have to handle two separate
documents, which is much harder than handling
even two strings from a single document (Yang
et al., 2018).
Dataset integrity There are two main limitations
to the quality of the dataset. First, some of the
questions are ecologically valid but simplistic. This
makes them suitable for a first line of evaluation,
but it means that most models can answer them
correctly (often without using any additional infor-
mation source), which leads to higher performance
on the benchmark. Second, sometimes the correct
answer is ambiguous. It can depend on the con-


[Page 10]
text and assumptions/priorities of the analyst. This
means that some gold standard labels are valid but
still contestable. Overall, from our extensive re-
views and analysis of the dataset, we believe that
the gold labels are high quality.
7 Conclusion
FINANCE BENCH reveals critical weaknesses in the
performance of state of the art models at financial
QA. Several of the models we tested had critical
weaknesses. Outside of the unrealistic Oracle set-
ting, even the very best performing model that we
test (GPT-4-Turbo with the long-context window)
is still only correct in 79% of cases. Such a model
could not be used with confidence in a live indus-
try setting. And, concerningly, even if an LLM
appears to be giving reasonable responses, there
remains a risk that its answers are hallucinations,
out-of-date, logically incorrect, or given with the
wrong units. All are serious risks to effective fi-
nancial analysis, and may not be apparent without
detailed inspection of the results.
Given the limitations identified by FI-
NANCE BENCH we encourage all analysts using
AI for financial QA to (1) robustly evaluate their
models before using them in high-stakes live
settings; (2) use additional sources of information
(such as vector stores and long-context content) to
improve performance; and (3) double check results
and triangulate findings by using multiple sources
of evidence. We also encourage other researchers
to build on our findings and test other AI models
and retrieval systems, as well as approaches such
as fine-tuning, few-shot learning, chain of thought
(Wang et al., 2023), and adding additional “tools”
such as calculators and APIs, could drive better
performance. Future work will expand the scope
and coverage of FINANCE BENCH and address the
limitations identified in this paper.
References
Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath, Sandipan Kundu,
Amanda Askell, Jackson Kernion, Andy Jones, Anna
Chen, Anna Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini, Cameron
McKinnon, Carol Chen, Catherine Olsson, Christo-
pher Olah, Danny Hernandez, Dawn Drain, Deep
Ganguli, Dustin Li, Eli Tran-Johnson, Ethan Perez,
Jamie Kerr, Jared Mueller, Jeffrey Ladish, Joshua
Landau, Kamal Ndousse, Kamile Lukosuite, Liane
Lovitt, Michael Sellitto, Nelson Elhage, Nicholas
Schiefer, Noemi Mercado, Nova DasSarma, Robert
Lasenby, Robin Larson, Sam Ringer, Scott John-
ston, Shauna Kravec, Sheer El Showk, Stanislav Fort,
Tamera Lanham, Timothy Telleen-Lawton, Tom Con-
erly, Tom Henighan, Tristan Hume, Samuel R. Bow-
man, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Ben Mann, Dario Amodei,
Nicholas Joseph, Sam McCandlish, Tom Brown, and
Jared Kaplan. 2022. Constitutional ai: Harmlessness
from ai feedback.
Sébastien Bubeck, Varun Chandrasekaran, Ronen El-
dan, Johannes Gehrke, Eric Horvitz, Ece Kamar, Pe-
ter Lee, Yin Tat Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Scott Lundberg,
Harsha Nori, Hamid Palangi, Marco Tulio Ribeiro,
and Yi Zhang. 2023. Sparks of artificial general in-
telligence: Early experiments with gpt-4.
Ethan Callanan, Amarachi Mbakwe, Antony Papadim-
itriou, Yulong Pei, Mathieu Sibue, Xiaodan Zhu,
Zhiqiang Ma, Xiaomo Liu, and Sameena Shah. 2023.
Can gpt models be financial analysts? an evaluation
of chatgpt and gpt-4 on mock cfa exams.
Zhiyu Chen, Wenhu Chen, Charese Smiley, Sameena
Shah, Iana Borova, Dylan Langdon, Reema Moussa,
Matt Beane, Ting-Hao Huang, Bryan Routledge, and
William Yang Wang. 2021. FinQA: A dataset of nu-
merical reasoning over financial data. In Proceedings
of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-
ural Language Processing, pages 3697–3711, Online
and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Zhiyu Chen, Shiyang Li, Charese Smiley, Zhiqiang Ma,
Sameena Shah, and William Yang Wang. 2022. Con-
vFinQA: Exploring the chain of numerical reasoning
in conversational finance question answering. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing , pages 6279–
6292, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Stephen Choi, William Gazeley, Siu Ho Wong, and
Tingting Li. 2023. Conversational financial informa-
tion retrieval model (confirm).
Harm de Vries, Dzmitry Bahdanau, and Christopher
Manning. 2020. Towards ecologically valid research
on language user interfaces.
Jie Huang and Kevin Chen-Chuan Chang. 2023. To-
wards reasoning in large language models: A survey.
In Findings of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: ACL 2023 , pages 1049–1065, Toronto,
Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Shima Imani, Liang Du, and Harsh Shrivastava. 2023.
MathPrompter: Mathematical reasoning using large
language models. In Proceedings of the 61st An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (V olume 5: Industry Track) , pages 37–
42, Toronto, Canada. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Ehsan Kamalloo, Nouha Dziri, Charles Clarke, and
Davood Rafiei. 2023. Evaluating open-domain ques-
tion answering in the era of large language models.


[Page 11]
In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (V olume
1: Long Papers), pages 5591–5606, Toronto, Canada.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Tomáš Koˇciský, Jonathan Schwarz, Phil Blunsom, Chris
Dyer, Karl Moritz Hermann, Gábor Melis, and Ed-
ward Grefenstette. 2018. The NarrativeQA reading
comprehension challenge. Transactions of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics , 6:317–328.
Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio
Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Hein-
rich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rock-
täschel, Sebastian Riedel, and Douwe Kiela. 2020.
Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-
intensive nlp tasks. In Proceedings of the 34th Inter-
national Conference on Neural Information Process-
ing Systems, NIPS’20, Red Hook, NY , USA. Curran
Associates Inc.
Percy Liang, Rishi Bommasani, Tony Lee, Dimitris
Tsipras, Dilara Soylu, Michihiro Yasunaga, Yian
Zhang, Deepak Narayanan, Yuhuai Wu, Ananya Ku-
mar, Benjamin Newman, Binhang Yuan, Bobby Yan,
Ce Zhang, Christian Cosgrove, Christopher D. Man-
ning, Christopher Ré, Diana Acosta-Navas, Drew A.
Hudson, Eric Zelikman, Esin Durmus, Faisal Lad-
hak, Frieda Rong, Hongyu Ren, Huaxiu Yao, Jue
Wang, Keshav Santhanam, Laurel Orr, Lucia Zheng,
Mert Yuksekgonul, Mirac Suzgun, Nathan Kim,
Neel Guha, Niladri Chatterji, Omar Khattab, Peter
Henderson, Qian Huang, Ryan Chi, Sang Michael
Xie, Shibani Santurkar, Surya Ganguli, Tatsunori
Hashimoto, Thomas Icard, Tianyi Zhang, Vishrav
Chaudhary, William Wang, Xuechen Li, Yifan Mai,
Yuhui Zhang, and Yuta Koreeda. 2023. Holistic eval-
uation of language models.
Stephanie Lin, Jacob Hilton, and Owain Evans. 2022.
TruthfulQA: Measuring how models mimic human
falsehoods. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(V olume 1: Long Papers), pages 3214–3252, Dublin,
Ireland. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Linqing Liu, Patrick Lewis, Sebastian Riedel, and Pon-
tus Stenetorp. 2022. Challenges in generalization in
open domain question answering. In Findings of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: NAACL
2022, pages 2014–2029, Seattle, United States. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.
Pan Lu, Liang Qiu, Wenhao Yu, Sean Welleck, and
Kai-Wei Chang. 2023. A survey of deep learning for
mathematical reasoning. In Proceedings of the 61st
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (V olume 1: Long Papers), pages 14605–
14631, Toronto, Canada. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Macedo Maia, Siegfried Handschuh, André Freitas,
Brian Davis, Ross McDermott, Manel Zarrouk, and
Alexandra Balahur. 2018. Www’18 open challenge:
Financial opinion mining and question answering. In
Companion Proceedings of the The Web Conference
2018, WWW ’18, page 1941–1942, Republic and
Canton of Geneva, CHE. International World Wide
Web Conferences Steering Committee.
Yingjie Niu, Linyi Yang, Ruihai Dong, and Yue Zhang.
2023. Learning to generalize for cross-domain QA.
In Findings of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: ACL 2023 , pages 1298–1313, Toronto,
Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Harsha Nori, Nicholas King, Scott Mayer McKinney,
Dean Carignan, and Eric Horvitz. 2023. Capabilities
of gpt-4 on medical challenge problems.
OpenAI. 2023. Gpt-4 technical report.
Shuofei Qiao, Yixin Ou, Ningyu Zhang, Xiang Chen,
Yunzhi Yao, Shumin Deng, Chuanqi Tan, Fei Huang,
and Huajun Chen. 2023. Reasoning with language
model prompting: A survey. In Proceedings of the
61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (V olume 1: Long Papers), pages
5368–5393, Toronto, Canada. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Pranav Rajpurkar, Robin Jia, and Percy Liang. 2018.
Know what you don’t know: Unanswerable ques-
tions for SQuAD. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics (V olume 2: Short Papers), pages 784–789,
Melbourne, Australia. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Pranav Rajpurkar, Jian Zhang, Konstantin Lopyrev, and
Percy Liang. 2016. SQuAD: 100,000+ questions for
machine comprehension of text. In Proceedings of
the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing, pages 2383–2392, Austin,
Texas. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Anna Rogers, Matt Gardner, and Isabelle Augenstein.
2023. Qa dataset explosion: A taxonomy of nlp
resources for question answering and reading com-
prehension. ACM Comput. Surv., 55(10).
Julio Cesar Salinas Alvarado, Karin Verspoor, and Tim-
othy Baldwin. 2015. Domain adaption of named
entity recognition to support credit risk assessment.
In Proceedings of the Australasian Language Tech-
nology Association Workshop 2015 , pages 84–90,
Parramatta, Australia.
Raj Shah, Kunal Chawla, Dheeraj Eidnani, Agam Shah,
Wendi Du, Sudheer Chava, Natraj Raman, Charese
Smiley, Jiaao Chen, and Diyi Yang. 2022. When
FLUE meets FLANG: Benchmarks and large pre-
trained language model for financial domain. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing , pages 2322–
2335, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Al-
bert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay
Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti


[Page 12]
Bhosale, Dan Bikel, Lukas Blecher, Cristian Canton
Ferrer, Moya Chen, Guillem Cucurull, David Esiobu,
Jude Fernandes, Jeremy Fu, Wenyin Fu, Brian Fuller,
Cynthia Gao, Vedanuj Goswami, Naman Goyal, An-
thony Hartshorn, Saghar Hosseini, Rui Hou, Hakan
Inan, Marcin Kardas, Viktor Kerkez, Madian Khabsa,
Isabel Kloumann, Artem Korenev, Punit Singh Koura,
Marie-Anne Lachaux, Thibaut Lavril, Jenya Lee, Di-
ana Liskovich, Yinghai Lu, Yuning Mao, Xavier Mar-
tinet, Todor Mihaylov, Pushkar Mishra, Igor Moly-
bog, Yixin Nie, Andrew Poulton, Jeremy Reizen-
stein, Rashi Rungta, Kalyan Saladi, Alan Schelten,
Ruan Silva, Eric Michael Smith, Ranjan Subrama-
nian, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Binh Tang, Ross Tay-
lor, Adina Williams, Jian Xiang Kuan, Puxin Xu,
Zheng Yan, Iliyan Zarov, Yuchen Zhang, Angela Fan,
Melanie Kambadur, Sharan Narang, Aurelien Ro-
driguez, Robert Stojnic, Sergey Edunov, and Thomas
Scialom. 2023. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-
tuned chat models.
Rajan Vivek, Kawin Ethayarajh, Diyi Yang, and Douwe
Kiela. 2023. Anchor points: Benchmarking models
with much fewer examples.
Boshi Wang, Sewon Min, Xiang Deng, Jiaming Shen,
You Wu, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Huan Sun. 2023.
Towards understanding chain-of-thought prompting:
An empirical study of what matters. In Proceedings
of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (V olume 1: Long Papers),
pages 2717–2739, Toronto, Canada. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Shijie Wu, Ozan Irsoy, Steven Lu, Vadim Dabravolski,
Mark Dredze, Sebastian Gehrmann, Prabhanjan Kam-
badur, David Rosenberg, and Gideon Mann. 2023.
Bloomberggpt: A large language model for finance.
Hongyang Yang, Xiao-Yang Liu, and Christina Dan
Wang. 2023. Fingpt: Open-source financial large
language models.
Zhilin Yang, Peng Qi, Saizheng Zhang, Yoshua Bengio,
William Cohen, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Christo-
pher D. Manning. 2018. HotpotQA: A dataset for
diverse, explainable multi-hop question answering.
In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages
2369–2380, Brussels, Belgium. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Rowan Zellers, Ari Holtzman, Yonatan Bisk, Ali
Farhadi, and Yejin Choi. 2019. HellaSwag: Can a ma-
chine really finish your sentence? In Proceedings of
the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, pages 4791–4800, Florence,
Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Liangyu Zha, Junlin Zhou, Liyao Li, Rui Wang, Qingyi
Huang, Saisai Yang, Jing Yuan, Changbao Su, Xiang
Li, Aofeng Su, Tao Zhang, Chen Zhou, Kaizhe Shou,
Miao Wang, Wufang Zhu, Guoshan Lu, Chao Ye,
Yali Ye, Wentao Ye, Yiming Zhang, Xinglong Deng,
Jie Xu, Haobo Wang, Gang Chen, and Junbo Zhao.
2023. Tablegpt: Towards unifying tables, nature
language and commands into one gpt.
Fengbin Zhu, Wenqiang Lei, Youcheng Huang, Chao
Wang, Shuo Zhang, Jiancheng Lv, Fuli Feng, and Tat-
Seng Chua. 2021. TAT-QA: A question answering
benchmark on a hybrid of tabular and textual con-
tent in finance. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics and the 11th International Joint Conference
on Natural Language Processing (V olume 1: Long
Papers), pages 3277–3287, Online. Association for
Computational Linguistics.


[Page 13]
Configuration Prompt Order Prompt
Closed Book - Answer this question:[QUESTION]
Shared Vector Store - Answer this question:[QUESTION]
Single Vector Store - Answer this question:[QUESTION]
LongContext
Context-First
Answer this question:[QUESTION]
Context:
[START OF FILING][FILING][END OF FILING]
Context-Last
Context:
[START OF FILING][FILING][END OF FILING]
Answer the following question:[QUESTION]
Oracle
Context-First
Answer this question:[QUESTION]
Context:
[START OF FILING][EVIDENCE EXTRACT][END OF FILING]
Context-Last
Context:
[START OF FILING][EVIDENCE EXTRACT][END OF FILING]
Answer the following question:[QUESTION]
Table 3: Prompt setups for the different evaluation configurations. Blue colored text denotes placeholder for the
question of interest and the relevant context. In addition, we added start- and end-delimiters ([START OF FILING]
and [END OF FILING]) to the prompts in the LongContext and Oracle configurations.
A Phrasing variations for the
metrics-based questions
To ensure that the metrics-generated questions are
realistic and diverse, we used templates to create
phrasing variations for each of the base questions.
This includes 11 “vanilla” introductory clauses and
11 more creative introductory clauses; and 7 vanilla
and 7 more creative ending clauses; as well as 2-3
unique ways of referring to each financial statement.
We also introduced randomness in the ordering that
statements are referred to, when multiple are refer-
enced, and randomness in the units. For instance,
the examples just given are in the benchmark as
“What is the FY2019 unadjusted operating income
(as reported by management) for Amazon? Answer
in USD millions. Please utilize information pro-
vided primarily within the income statement.” and
“We want to calculate a financial metric. Please
help us compute it by basing your answers off of
the income statement and the cash flow statement.
Here’s the question: what is PepsiCo’s FY2021
total D&A (as shown in cash flow statement) as a
percent of total revenue?”.
B LLM implementation
We test 16 model configurations, including the Or-
acle and Closed book settings. All were tested in
November 2023. Llama2 was accessed through
Replicate7 and the OpenAI and Anthropic models
were accessed through their respective APIs. We
used the default system prompts for all calls. Tem-
perature was set to 0.01 and max token length to
2,048. We show the employed prompts in Table 3.
For the long context configurations, we truncated
the filing input to 95,000 tokens if the relevant fil-
ing was not fitting into the possible context.
C Data Documentation
FINANCE BENCH comprises 10,231 cases, of which
150 are used for expert evaluation and are available
open-source.
Summary of columns There are 16 columns in
the dataset, which are associated with every entry.
1. A unique ID (of the form, “fi-
nacebench_id_0000”).
2. A value for whether it is in the eval sample
of 298 cases (‘1’), in the open source sample
(‘2’) or in neither (‘0’).
3. The company’s name.
4. The company’s sector following GICS sector
definitions.
5. The name of the public filing used to pose and
answer the question.
7https://replicate.com/meta/llama-2-70b-chat


[Page 14]
6. A link to the relevant public filing. Where
possible, we used static PDFs from the com-
pany’s investor relations page or other rep-
utable sources like EDGAR.
7. A label for the document type (e.g. 10K,
10Q).
8. The fiscal year that the document is referenc-
ing. If the document is an 8K, then it refers to
calendar year since these documents generally
are not released following fiscal year calen-
dars. The fiscal years were labelled using the
following convention: use the calendar year
of the fiscal year end as the fiscal year. This
means if a fiscal year ends in January 2023,
we label that fiscal year as FY2023. The one
exception to this rule is Johnson & Johnson
whose fiscal year ends in the first few days of
January.
9. The question type (reflecting the three types
in FINANCE BENCH : domain-relevant, novel-
generated, and metrics-generated).
10. The type of reasoning (e.g. numerical reason-
ing).
11. The domain-relevant question number (if rele-
vant), which runs from dg01 to dg25.
12. The actual question.
13. The gold standard answer.
14. The evidence text. In the cases of domain-
relevant questions and novel-generated ques-
tions, these are the evidence texts that anno-
tators directly extracted themselves. In the
case of metrics-generated questions, we con-
structed the evidence text as follows: (i) for
each base metric that is a building block of
the main metric in question, extract the page
number from the PDF where that base metric
was calculated or extracted; (ii) using the PDF
page number, extract the entire PDF page text
so as to ensure much (if not all) of the financial
statement, where the base metric was found in,
is extracted as well; (iii) combine the different
full page texts and remove duplicates
15. The evidence text page number. Note that all
page numbers are 1-indexed.
16. The full page text found in the financial doc-
ument for each evidence text page number.
This is to provide a larger relevant context
around each evidence text chosen by annota-
tors.
17. Where relevant, the justification for each an-
swer.
Dataset description There are 40 companies in
FINANCE BENCH , of which 32 companies are in
the metrics-generated questions and 37 are in the
domain-generic and novel-generated questions. 29
companies appear in all three types of questions.
There are 360 documents in total, of which 270
are 10Ks (the vast majority, accounting for 75% of
all documents), 5 are annual reports (which largely
cover the exact same content as the 10k but with
additional prose at the start), 29 are 8Ks, 29 are
Earnings reports, and 27 are 10Qs. The distribu-
tion of questions is more unequal, with 10Ks ac-
counting for 9,530 questions (or 93% of the total).
This is due to the technical detail contained within
10Ks, as well as their importance within the finance
industry. Nine of the 11 GICS sectors are repre-
sented, ranging from Information Technology (25%
of questions) to Materials (1.8%). Every entry has
an evidence text and evidence page number. 749 of
the domain-relevant and novel-generated questions
have justifications.
D Comparison of GPT-4 and
GPT-4-Turbo
While we have evaluated GPT-4 and GPT-4-Turbo,
we only show the better performing model GPT-4-
Turbo in the main text. We provide a comparison
on the model performances in each evaluated set-
ting in Figure 5. Note that we cannot compare
performance on the LongContext setting as GPT-4
doesn’t support a long context setting.
E Information about each company
See the information in Table 4.


[Page 15]
GPT4 
(Closed Book)
GPT4 Turbo 
(Closed Book)
GPT4 
(Shared Store)
GPT4 Turbo 
(Shared Store)
GPT4 
(Single Store)
GPT4 Turbo 
(Single Store)
GPT4 
(Oracle*)
GPT4 Turbo 
(Oracle*)
GPT4 
(Oracle)
GPT4 Turbo 
(Oracle)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0% of Evaluation Data
Correct answer Incorrect answer Failure to answer
Figure 5: Performance Comparison of OpenAI’s GPT-4 and GPT-4-Turbo across the different evaluation configu-
rations. Note that we cannot compare performance on the LongContext setting as GPT4 doesn’t support a long
context setting.


[Page 16]
Company Symbol Market cap GICS Sector S&P 500
3M MMM $48.5 billion Industrials Yes
AES Corporation AES $8.44 billion Utilities Yes
Amcor AMCR $12.92 billion Materials Yes
AMD AMD $166.27 billion Information Technology Yes
Activision Blizzard ATVI $73.7 billion Communication Services Yes
Adobe ADBE $235.14 billion Information Technology Yes
American Express AXP $108.33 billion Financials Yes
American Water Works AWK $23.11 billion Utilities Yes
Apple AAPL $2730 billion Information Technology Yes
Best Buy BBY $14.72 billion Consumer Discretionary Yes
Boeing BA $112.37 billion Industrials Yes
CVS Health CVS $89.59 billion Health Care Yes
Coca-Cola KO $226.51 billion Consumer Staples Yes
Corning GLW $25.32 billion Information Technology Yes
Costco COST $252.18 billion Consumer Staples Yes
eBay EBAY $22.68 billion Consumer Discretionary Yes
FedEx FDX $65.16 billion Industrials Yes
Foot Locker FL $1.79 billion Consumer Discretionary No
General Mills GIS $36.25 billion Consumer Staples Yes
Intel INTC $150.31 billion Information Technology Yes
JPMorgan JPM $415.28 billion Financials Yes
Johnson Johnson JNJ $378.4 billion Health Care Yes
Lockheed Martin LMT $100.07 billion Industrials Yes
MGM Resorts MGM $12.21 billion Consumer Discretionary Yes
McDonalds MCD $183.82 billion Consumer Discretionary Yes
Microsoft MSFT $2370 billion Information Technology Yes
Nike NKE $146.56 billion Consumer Discretionary Yes
Netflix NFLX $165.11 billion Communication Services Yes
Oracle ORCL $296.81 billion Information Technology Yes
PGE Corporation PCG $39.41 billion Utilities Yes
Paypal PYPL $63.12 billion Financials Yes
PepsiCo PEP $220.39 billion Consumer Staples Yes
Pfizer PFE $188.97 billion Health Care Yes
Salesforce CRM $196.56 billion Information Technology Yes
Ulta Beauty ULTA $19.14 billion Consumer Discretionary Yes
Verizon VZ $133.77 billion Communication Services Yes
Walmart WMT $428.17 billion Consumer Staples Yes
Block SQ $26.8 billion Information Technology No
Amazon AMZN $1325 billion Consumer Discretionary Yes
Kraft Heinz KHC $33.47 billion Consumer Staples Yes
Table 4: Summary of companies that appear in FINANCE BENCH