[Page 1]
FinBERT-FOMC: Fine-Tuned FinBERT Model with Sentiment
Focus Method for Enhancing Sentiment Analysis of FOMC
Minutes
Ziwei Chen∗
ziwei.chen@student.unisg.ch
University of St.Gallen
St.Gallen, Switzerland
Sandro Gössi∗
sandroantoniours.goessi@student.unisg.ch
University of St.Gallen
St.Gallen, Switzerland
Wonseong Kim
wonseongkim@korea.ac.kr
University of St.Gallen
St.Gallen, Switzerland
Korea University
Seoul, South Korea
Bernhard Bermeitinger
bernhard.bermeitinger@unisg.ch
University of St.Gallen
St.Gallen, Switzerland
Siegfried Handschuh
siegfried.handschuh@unisg.ch
University of St.Gallen
St.Gallen, Switzerland
ABSTRACT
In this research project, we used the financial texts published by
the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), known as the FOMC
Minutes, for sentiment analysis. The pre-trained FinBERT model, a
state-of-the-art transformer-based model trained for NLP tasks in
finance, was utilized for that. The focus of this research has been
on improving the predictive performance of complex financial sen-
tences, as our problem analysis has shown that such sentences pose
a significant challenge to existing models. To accomplish this objec-
tive the original FinBERT model was fine-tuned for domain-specific
sentiment analysis. A strategy, referred to as Sentiment Focus (SF)
was utilized to reduce the complexity of sentences, making them
more amenable to accurate sentiment predictions.
To evaluate the efficacy of our method, we curated a manually
labeled test dataset comprising 1,375 entries. The results demon-
strated an overall improvement of 5 % in accuracy when using
SF-enhanced fine-tuned FinBERT over the original FinBERT model.
In cases of complex sentences containing conjunctions like but,
while, and though with contradicting sentiments, our fine-tuned
model outperformed the original FinBERT by a margin of 17.4 %.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Computing methodologies → Natural language processing;
Supervised learning by classification; Neural networks; •Applied
computing → Economics.
KEYWORDS
Natural Language Processing, Economics, Financial Economics,
Sentiment Analysis, FinBERT, FOMC Minutes, Sentiment Focus
∗Both authors contributed equally to this research.
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs International 4.0 License.
ICAIF ’23, November 27–29, 2023, Brooklyn, NY, USA
© 2023 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0240-2/23/11.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3604237.3626843
ACM Reference Format:
Ziwei Chen, Sandro Gössi, Wonseong Kim, Bernhard Bermeitinger, and Siegfried
Handschuh. 2023. FinBERT-FOMC: Fine-Tuned FinBERT Model with Senti-
ment Focus Method for Enhancing Sentiment Analysis of FOMC Minutes.
In 4th ACM International Conference on AI in Finance (ICAIF ’23), Novem-
ber 27–29, 2023, Brooklyn, NY, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 8 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3604237.3626843
1 THE FEDERAL RESERVE
The Federal Reserve, or Fed for short, is the name of the central
bank of the United States of America. The Fed consists of a central
governmental agency in Washington, D.C., and twelve regional
Federal Reserve Banks located in major cities throughout the United
States. This central banking system was established in 1913 to
provide the country with a safe, flexible, and stable monetary and
financial system1.
The Federal Reserve’s responsibilities include conducting na-
tional monetary policy, supervising and regulating banks, maintain-
ing the stability of the U.S. dollar, and providing financial services
to depository institutions, the U.S. government, and foreign public
entities.
With the evolution of monetary policy, the Federal Reserve has
implemented policy tools that address concerns as well as publicly
communicate information about the state of the economy.
1.1 The Federal Open Market Committee
(FOMC)
The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) is a branch of the
Federal Reserve that is responsible for making key decisions about
interest rates and the growth of the United States’ money supply.
It is arguably the most important part of the Federal Reserve
System because it is in charge of formulating and implementing
monetary policy, which has wide-ranging impacts on the national
and global economy [12].
The FOMC consists of twelve members, including the seven
members of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,
the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, and four of
1https://www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/structure-federal-reserve-system.htm
357


[Page 2]
ICAIF ’23, November 27–29, 2023, Brooklyn, NY, USA Ziwei Chen, Sandro Gössi, et al.
the remaining eleven Reserve Bank presidents, who serve one-year
terms on a rotating basis.
1.2 FOMC Meetings, Minutes, and Statements
The FOMC holds eight regularly scheduled meetings during the year
and additional meetings as needed to discuss the outlook for the U.S.
economy and make adequate policy decisions, whilst concurrently
acknowledging and navigating the complexities and exigencies of
the international economic landscape. The decisions taken during
these meetings can influence the size and rate of growth of the
money supply, which in turn affects interest rates2.
Following these meetings, a statement is released to announce
the decisions made regarding monetary policy which provides a
summary of the committee’s current assessment of economic condi-
tions and projections and the rationale behind any policy changes.
The minutes of the FOMC meetings are a more detailed record
of the released post-meeting statement. They provide a full account
of policy discussions, including differing views and analysis of
the economic conditions that influenced the votes of the members.
These minutes are released three weeks after each meeting. The
objective of this natural language processing research was to predict
the sentiment embedded within financial texts utilizing the FOMC
minutes.
1.3 Motivation
These tools of the Federal Reserve—the meetings, statements, and
minutes—are important because they provide insight into the think-
ing of one of the most influential economic policy-making bodies in
the world. For example, since the US Federal Reserve began raising
the federal funds rate in March 2022, almost all asset classes have
performed poorly [9].
They are closely watched by economists, traders, and investors
because they can provide clues about the future direction of mone-
tary policy and thus about future economic conditions [12]. There
have been well-documented cases of world-renowned hedge funds
using sentiment analysis to capture monetary policy decisions in
fractions of a second [2]. Also, large Banks such as Morgan Stan-
ley have patented AI-powered tools that help them predict mone-
tary policy actions by analyzing the Federal Reserve’s communica-
tions [7].
Modifications in monetary policy, like Fed policy rate changes,
significantly affect financial markets because they are closely in-
terconnected. Understanding the FOMC’s sentiment can be very
important for decision-making in many different sectors of the
economy [8].
The FOMC Minutes are chosen as financial text data because they
present a compelling problem statement with substantial relevance
to both economic research and practical financial management. The
FOMC minutes are unique in that they are a rich source of quali-
tative information reflecting the Federal Reserve’s comprehensive
thoughts on the U.S. economy [8].
The text-based format of the FOMC Minutes provides a valu-
able opportunity to apply natural language processing techniques
facilitating a deeper exploration of sentiment analysis models.
2https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm
Despite the complexity of the linguistic nuances often found in
FOMC minutes, we were motivated by the potential insights that
can be gained from transforming and quantifying these textual data
into actionable economic sentiment indicators.
1.4 Task Description
The task of this project was to train a model that can accurately
determine, based on the analysis of a range of sentences extracted
from the FOMC Minutes, whether the overall sentiment of the
financial economy expressed by the Federal Reserve is positive or
negative.
This is a typical classification problem, with the class labels being
positive, neutral, or negative. To address such sentiment analysis
problems, there exist a variety of natural language processing and
machine learning algorithms that can be employed, including Naive
Bayes, logistic regression, support vector machines, deep learning
models such as LSTMs/RNNs [4], and transformer-based models
like BERT [3], GPT [6], and others. These models can capture and
quantify the sentiment conveyed through the nuances of language
in texts.
Our ultimate goal is to choose and use an existing pre-trained
model and improve its performance and effective prediction capa-
bilities for sentiment analysis for domain-specific financial texts
such as FOMC Minutes through transfer learning and the power of
fine-tuning.
1.5 Research Objectives
In this research project, we define our objectives in four key areas
of benefit where sentiment analysis of the FOMC minutes can be
valuable in providing nuanced understanding and insights into
economic trends and monetary policy. The identified areas of focus
are:
1.5.1 Understanding Market Situations. Sentiment analysis on the
FOMC minutes can provide valuable insights into market expecta-
tions. The sentiment expressed by the Federal Reserve reflects its
assessment of economic conditions and the potential direction of
future monetary policy. By analyzing this sentiment, one can gain
a deeper understanding of the market’s anticipations about future
economic trends and policy shifts, which can influence investment
decisions, portfolio management, and risk assessments.
1.5.2 Predicting Market Reactions. Financial markets often react
strongly to the information contained in the FOMC minutes. Posi-
tive or negative sentiment can drive market optimism or pessimism,
affecting asset prices, volatility, and trading volumes. Through sen-
timent analysis, it is possible to gain a predictive edge regarding
market reactions.
1.5.3 Assessing Economic Outlook. The sentiment expressed in
the FOMC minutes is a reflection of the Federal Reserve’s view
on the economic outlook of the U.S. economy. It covers various
facets including growth prospects, inflation, labor market condi-
tions, and potential risks to the economic forecast. By performing
sentiment analysis on these aspects, we can quantify the Federal
Reserve’s economic outlook, capturing nuanced views that can
enhance traditional economic forecasts.
358


[Page 3]
FinBERT-FOMC: FinBERT with Sentiment Focus ICAIF ’23, November 27–29, 2023, Brooklyn, NY, USA
1.5.4 Understanding Policy Implications. The Federal Reserve’s
views and sentiments expressed in the FOMC minutes have far-
reaching policy implications. They often hint at the future direction
of monetary policy, including decisions about interest rates and the
management of the money supply. Understanding this sentiment
can shed light on the potential impact of such policy changes on
various sectors of the economy, such as impacts on borrowing costs,
investment decisions, and spending behavior.
1.6 Data Set
We have used the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) Minutes
as our primary and only data source. The dataset spans from January
2006 to February 2023, providing a comprehensive longitudinal
perspective on the sentiment and policy shifts of the Federal Reserve
during this time period.
Existing research on sentiment analysis in FOMC Minutes has
typically utilized word-level analysis, even when dealing with
longer paragraphs. However, this research project seeks to explore
the benefits of sentence-level sentiment analysis in order to gain a
more contextual understanding of the FOMC language data.
Kim et al. consists of 32,330 sentences, which offers a compre-
hensive collection of financial texts for sentiment analysis. The
entries within the dataset were initially categorized by an author,
necessitating a subsequent phase of manual labeling. This task was
further enriched by the incorporation of labels from two additional
researchers. This initial phase facilitated the establishment of a
foundational set of categorized data, which was subsequently em-
ployed as a test set to assess our models, post-training, within the
context of sentiment analysis.
1.7 Target Evaluation
As outlined in the task description, the performance of our senti-
ment analysis model on the FOMC Minutes will be evaluated using
the accuracy metric for three classes: positive, negative, and neutral
sentiments. Accuracy measures the proportion of true results (both
true positives, true negatives, or true neutral) divided by the total
number of sentences classified. It is an effective performance mea-
surement tool for binary and multi-class classification problems.
The range of accuracy is from 0 to 1, with a higher accuracy value
indicating superior model performance. In our case, a high accuracy
score would signify our model’s strong ability to correctly classify
the sentiment of sentences from the FOMC Minutes.
1.8 Baseline
Establishing a baseline for this project presents a unique scenario as
our original dataset was originally unlabeled and required manual
categorization. So there exists no conventional benchmark for a
direct comparison.
However, after the initial labeling, we used the original FinBERT
model as a sentiment analysis classifier to provide a preliminary
performance measure. In this way, we obtained a baseline accuracy
of 0.84 derived from the hand-crafted and manually labeled test
dataset.
This figure will serve as our reference point for model improve-
ment and comparison throughout our research. The comprehensive
methodology used to achieve this initial accuracy is discussed in sec-
tion 2.
As our dataset is novel in its formation, it is essential to note
that its individuality contributes to the novelty and significance of
our research.
2 METHODOLOGY
2.1 Related Work
In the initial stage of our research, we embarked on a comprehensive
study of related work in the field, specifically those employing the
FOMC Minutes. By reading academic papers and seminal works, we
aimed to understand the current state of knowledge in the field, the
methodological approaches commonly adopted, and the challenges
faced by other researchers. We also focused on identifying gaps in
the existing literature that our research could address. This helped to
inform our methodology and also provided a theoretical grounding
for our research, aligning our work within the broader context of
sentiment analysis in financial economics.
This research project is based on the research of Kim et al .,
which highlights the challenges and limitations of using current
NLP techniques to analyze FOMC communications, as well as the
potential for improving language models and exploring alternative
approaches.
In Kim et al., they employed advanced language modeling tech-
niques such as VADER and FinBERT, as well as an experimental
test with GPT-4 on the FOMC Minutes dataset, and analyzed the
results. The results from this study show that FinBERT outperforms
other techniques, especially in accurately predicting negative senti-
ment. Nonetheless, the study suggests that further improvements
are necessary to optimize the performance of both FinBERT and
GPT-4 in analyzing the sentiment of FOMC Minutes.
These findings formed the basis for our research project, which
aimed to focus on improving the accuracy of sentiment analysis
for complex financial texts and exploring alternative approaches to
provide more comprehensive economic insights.
2.2 Model Selection
2.2.1 Reasoning. Our analysis of related work has shown that the
unique characteristics of the FOMC Minutes, such as its complex
sentence structures and lower emotional content, present chal-
lenges for analysis by current NLP techniques and models.
The paper by Kim et al. demonstrates that FinBERT is superior
to other methods in extracting sentiment from FOMC minutes,
while GPT-4’s performance is comparatively weaker, despite be-
ing a cutting-edge technique. Their findings revealed that GPT-4
struggles to accurately discern sentiment in intricate sentences,
with many being classified as neutral despite potentially being pos-
itive or negative. According to the study, FinBERT also appears to
outperform VADER in sentiment analysis of FOMC financial text
data.
These considerations and findings were why FinBERT was cho-
sen for this research.
2.2.2 FinBERT. FinBERT is an open-source pre-trained NLP model
based on the BERT architecture to analyze the sentiment of financial
texts.
359


[Page 4]
ICAIF ’23, November 27–29, 2023, Brooklyn, NY, USA Ziwei Chen, Sandro Gössi, et al.
It is therefore a variant of the BERT model [3]. BERT models are
designed to understand the context of words in a text by analyzing
the words that come before and after it and have caused a revolu-
tion in the world of NLP by providing superior results on many
NLP tasks, such as question answering, text generation, sentence
classification, and many more compared to other methods.
According to Araci, general-purpose models such as BERT are
not effective enough for domain-specific tasks because of the spe-
cialized language used in the financial context. Pre-trained language
models can help with this problem because they require fewer la-
beled examples and they can be further trained on domain-specific
corpora. That’s why many domain-specific models have emerged
using BERT as the base and are being used for a variety of use cases.
FinBERT is built by further training the BERT language model
in the finance domain. It uses a large financial corpus, including
news articles, corporate reports, and regulatory filings, thereby
fine-tuning it for financial sentiment classification. The additional
training corpus is a set of 1.8M Reuters news articles called TRC2
which were published by Reuters between 2008 and 2010 and Fi-
nancial PhraseBank, which consists of 4,845 English sentences se-
lected randomly from financial news found in the LexisNexis data-
base [1]. These sentences then were annotated by 16 people with
backgrounds in finance and business. In summary, it is trained on
the following three financial communication corpora with a total
corpora size of 4.9B tokens [11].
• Corporate Reports 10-K & 10-Q: 2.5B tokens
• Earnings Call Transcripts: 1.3B tokens
• Analyst Reports: 1.1B tokens
The model is designed to capture the nuances and complexi-
ties of financial language and terminology, making it suitable for
various financial text analysis tasks. Consequently, FinBERT can
be a powerful tool for sentiment analysis, document classification,
named entity recognition, and other NLP tasks within the financial
domain. It outperforms almost all other NLP techniques for finan-
cial sentiment analysis. The sentiment score of the FinBERT model
is normalized to a range of −1 to 1.
2.3 Data Preparation
In the initial phase of our research, we focused on curating and
segmenting the FOMC Minutes data. The data was accessed from
the Federal Reserve website by navigating to News & Events, select-
ing Press Releases, and specifying the press type as Monetary Policy,
where the Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee can be
found. Our primary goal was to convert large bodies of text into
individual sentences for later analysis.
2.4 Run FinBERT Using Raw Data Set
Our dataset, which was preprocessed into individual sentences,
was fed to the FinBERT model [1]. For each sentence, we utilized
the model to perform text classification, outputting a sentiment
label and corresponding confidence score. The label represented the
sentiment of the sentence, while the score quantified the model’s
confidence in its prediction. These results were stored alongside
the original sentences in a structured format. This iterative process
was carried out for all sentences in our dataset. The total runtime
Table 1: Examples of Misclassification Errors on Complex
Sentences
Example Sentence Label Score
“Aggregate hours fell slightly in Decem-
ber owing to a decrease in the workweek,
but they rose over the fourth quarter as a
whole. ”
negative 0.9988
“Real spending in the high-tech sector de-
clined, although real outlays for computing
equipment posted their first gain in a year. ”
positive 0.9994
was around two hours for 32,330 sentences, averaging a processing
speed of about five sentences per second.
2.5 Re-Label Data Set
In order to assess the performance of the FinBERT predictions,
we independently and manually appraised the sentiment of each
sentence, assigning our own sentiment labels manually based on
our expert economic judgment. By placing our labels adjacent to the
FinBERT predictions, we facilitated a straightforward comparison
between the predicted and actual sentiments.
This exercise allowed us to discern the instances where the Fin-
BERT model accurately captured the sentiment of a sentence, and
more importantly, identify the cases where the model’s predictions
proved to be false and deviated from our manual assessment. This
side-by-side comparison was crucial for evaluating the performance
of the FinBERT model in correctly classifying sentiment in our spe-
cific dataset and helped us analyze where the state-of-the-art model
fell short in predicting the sentiment of the FOMC Minutes.
2.6 Problem Analysis
We conducted a comprehensive review to uncover the limitations
of the FinBERT model in accurately capturing sentiment in our
financial texts and developed strategies for potential improvements.
Our analysis has shown that FinBERT exhibits exceptional perfor-
mance in processing straightforward financial statements. However,
we found that the classification accuracy of the model decreased
significantly with increasing sentence complexity, particularly for
sentences containing disjunctive or contrasting conjunctions such
as although, while, and but. These sentences often encapsulate nu-
anced sentiments that seem to pose a challenge for the FinBERT
model and can lead to misclassification. Two example sentences
that illustrate this misclassification problem are as shown in table 1.
The sentiment focus of the first sentence should be onrose in the
part after but, therefore the correct classification would be positive;
the sentiment focus of the second sentence should be on declined
in the first part, and the part of the sentence containing although
should be ignored, the correct classification should be negative.
This problem analysis provides a solid foundation for developing
improvement plans and model enhancement strategies.
360


[Page 5]
FinBERT-FOMC: FinBERT with Sentiment Focus ICAIF ’23, November 27–29, 2023, Brooklyn, NY, USA
Table 2: Example of the Preprocessing Steps
Example sentence Label Score
(Before) “While light vehicle sales had
slowed in the fall, consumer spending out-
side the auto sector appeared to have re-
mained vigorous. ”
negative 0.9847
(After) “consumer spending outside the auto
sector appeared to have remained vigorous. ” positive 0.8261
2.7 Find and Apply Solution
Our findings highlight the need for a more sophisticated interpre-
tation of linguistic subtleties by the model and suggest the incor-
poration of more advanced preprocessing steps, linguistic features,
or training strategies that can help FinBERT better understand
these complex sentence structures and thus improve its overall
performance.
2.7.1 Remove Comma. This preprocessing step aims for sentences
characterized by the presence of disjunctive or contrasting con-
junctions. From the target sentence, it selectively removes commas
that were followed by the main verb or conjunction. This selective
removal of the comma aimed to simplify sentence structure and
mitigate instances of model misinterpretation, especially in cases
where the conjunction introduces contrasting sentiments or alterna-
tives. This first preprocessing step, therefore, played a pivotal role
in reducing sentence complexity and enhancing model accuracy.
2.7.2 Sentiment Focus. As a second step in our text simplification
process, we employed sentiment focus to shift the emphasis of a
sentence based on certain keywords such as but, although, though,
and while. This step changed the focus of sentences by retaining
the sentence segments that were most likely to contain the main
sentiment. Our observation was that in complex sentences, the main
sentiment is often encapsulated in the section of the sentence that
follows these contrasting conjunctions. By adjusting the sentence
focus on this part of the sentence, we ensured that the sentiment
analysis was conducted on the most sentiment-relevant portion of
the text, thereby increasing the accuracy of FinBERT’s predictions.
These two preprocessing steps combined, provide a more so-
phisticated approach to processing complex sentences, aimed at
simplifying complex sentences and reducing misinterpretation diffi-
culties, potentially enhancing the overall performance of sentiment
analysis using the FinBERT model.
2.7.3 Preprocessing Example. In the example in table 2, we can
see that when the original sentence contains the contrasting con-
junctions while, FinBERT is influenced by the word slowed in the
sentence and takes this as the main sentiment, which causes the
real sentiment focus vigorous to be ignored and thus makes the
incorrect classification negative.
After SF, the sentence part containing while was removed, and
FinBERT succeeded in giving the correct classification of positive.
For all contrasting conjunctions, SF will remove the non-sentiment
focus to ensure correct classification.
2.8 Create Complex Sentence Data Set
After preprocessing all 32,330 FOMC Minutes sentences in our
dataset, only 3,535 records were changed by our preprocessing
method. Therefore we can conclude, that only 3,535 out of 32,330
sentences were complex sentences and the rest were simple sen-
tences.
For our ongoing analysis, we created a new dataset solely com-
prised of complex sentences. These sentences were specifically
those for which our preprocessing had identified and shifted the
sentiment focus and modified the sentence, indicating the pres-
ence of more intricate linguistic structures. This resulted in a new
specialized dataset containing 3,535 complex sentences, thus isolat-
ing a subset of our data that could be particularly challenging for
sentiment analysis.
2.9 FinBERT Fine-Tuning
We applied FinBERT to a complex sentence dataset containing
both simplified and focus-shifted sentences and stored the new
sentiments predicted by FinBERT as new labels. This dataset of
3,535 complex sentences containing the new labels then constitutes
the training set for fine-tuning FinBERT, where traditional FinBERT
seemed to underperform. For fine-tuning FinBERT, we followed a
similar approach and method as Wang proposed.
We loaded our saved training data and split it into training, vali-
dation, and testing sets in an 8:1:1 ratio. During this data preparation
step, the labels neutral, positive, and negative were encoded into the
numerical values (0, 1, 2).
The model was trained for five epochs with a learning rate of
2 × 10−5. We used the accuracy metric for model evaluation and set
the model to save the best model parameters based on this metric.
2.10 Model Evaluation and Comparison
Finally, we used our manually labeled test dataset for the crucial task
of evaluating the performance of our fine-tuned FinBERT model.
This additional dataset from section 1.6 consists of 1,375 individual
entries, each of which were manually selected and assigned the
appropriate sentiment label. As an important step in the validation
process, it allowed us to compare the model’s predictions against
the actual labels, which allowed us to determine the effectiveness
of the fine-tuning process and sentiment focus technique. This
selection of data served as the basis for our ground truth against
which we evaluated the performance of our models. In total, we
evaluated three methods on this manually labeled test set:
(1) FinBERT: Accuracy of the original FinBERT model
(2) Text Simplification & FinBERT: Accuracy after applying
the text simplification pre-processing steps (remove comma
and Sentiment Focus) before using FinBERT
(3) Fine-Tuned FinBERT: Accuracy of the fine-tuned FinBERT
model
3 RESULTS
3.1 Accuracy: Manually Labeled Test Set
First, we evaluated and compared the performance of the orig-
inal FinBERT model and the fine-tuned model on the manually
361


[Page 6]
ICAIF ’23, November 27–29, 2023, Brooklyn, NY, USA Ziwei Chen, Sandro Gössi, et al.
FinBERT Fine-tuned FinBERT after SF0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0.84 0.88 0.86
Accuracy
Figure 1: Overall: FinBERT vs. Fine-tuned FinBERT vs. Fin-
BERT after SF
labeled test dataset. Figure 1 shows the improvement in the perfor-
mance of the fine-tuned FinBERT model compared to the original
FinBERT model. Before any manipulation, the original FinBERT
model achieved an accuracy of 0.8407 on the manually labeled test
dataset. However, after simplifying the sentences in the dataset us-
ing the predefined pre-processing steps from sections 2.7.1 and 2.7.2
which simplified the text inputs and helped to set the focus on the
sentence’s sentiment-bearing components, the accuracy improved
to 0.8575. More notably, the fine-tuned model’s performance sur-
passed both, with an accuracy score on the original sentences of
approximately 0.8829. Both these findings validate our hypothesis
that Sentiment Focus or a model fine-tuned on a dataset of complex
financial sentences can perform better at sentiment analysis tasks.
In evaluating the results of the model, it is important to empha-
size that the 5.02 % performance improvement of our fine-tuned
model over the original FinBERT may appear marginal at first
glance. However, this modest increase in performance has a critical
context that reinforces its significance.
Our test data set and the original data set consisted predomi-
nantly of simple sentences, whereas the original FinBERT already
demonstrated considerable proficiency in its sentiment classifica-
tion abilities. Thus, this minor improvement is primarily attribut-
able to the model’s ability to better handle more complex sentences,
which was the main challenge for the original FinBERT. Conse-
quently, the success of the fine-tuned model and the Sentiment
Focus method in these challenging cases underscores its improved
robustness and capacity to more accurately classify sentiments
across a variety of sentences.
3.2 Accuracy: Complex Sentences Sub Testset
After our first performance comparison, we sought to compare the
performance of the original FinBERT model, the fine-tuned model,
and FinBERT after applying sentiment focus (SF) on the subset of
complex sentences in our test dataset. These complex sentences,
FinBERT Fine-tuned FinBERT after SF0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0.74
0.87 0.83
Accuracy
Figure 2: Complex only: FinBERT vs. Fine-tuned FinBERT
vs. FinBERT after SF
as identified in the problem analysis section, pose a significant
challenge to sentiment analysis with the original FinBERT model.
In the comparison in fig. 2, we observe a substantial improve-
ment in accuracy of 17.40 % with the fine-tuned model, reaching
0.8710 accuracy, compared to the original FinBERT’s0.7419. The
original FinBERT model, in combination with the sentiment focus
pre-processing step, also showed improved performance, achieving
an accuracy of 0.8347. These results demonstrate the effective-
ness of the Sentiment Focus solution and our fine-tuning process,
particularly for complex sentences, which presented the primary
area of difficulty for the original FinBERT model. The enhanced
performance of FinBERT after SF underscores the significance of
simplifying sentences to improve sentiment classification, even
without additional model fine-tuning.
3.3 Accuracy: Different Pronouns
In addition, to get more in-depth insights, we also performed a more
granular analysis of the sentiment classification results on the test
data. We specifically examined sentences that contain the wordsbut,
while, and though to get a better understanding of where our model
improved. As we identified in the problem analysis, these words
often introduce complexity into a sentence by indicating contrast or
presenting multiple sentiments in the same sentence. Our analysis
showed notable differences between the performance of the origi-
nal FinBERT model and our fine-tuned model concerning sentence
complexity. The fine-tuned model consistently outperformed the
original FinBERT in accurately classifying the sentiments of such
sentences. For instance, in sentences containing but, the fine-tuned
model achieved an accuracy of 0.8614, compared to FinBERT’s
0.6733. Similarly, for sentences with while, the fine-tuned model’s
accuracy was 1, matching FinBERT’s 0.8750. In sentences with
though, the fine-tuned model attained an accuracy of 0.9038, which
was significantly higher than FinBERT’s0.7308. These findings un-
derline the improved capability of our fine-tuned model in handling
362


[Page 7]
FinBERT-FOMC: FinBERT with Sentiment Focus ICAIF ’23, November 27–29, 2023, Brooklyn, NY, USA
Table 3: Accuracy for Sentences with Different Conjunctions
Conjunction FinBERT Fine-tuned
but 0.6733 0 .8614
while 0.8750 1 .0000
though 0.7308 0 .9038
sentence complexity, which makes it a valuable tool for nuanced
sentiment analysis necessary in these complex financial sentences.
4 DISCUSSION
4.1 Discussion of Results
This study set out to enhance the performance of the original Fin-
BERT model in classifying financial sentences, with a focus on
solving the problems that come with more challenging complex
sentences.
The primary findings suggest that our proposed method of sim-
plifying sentences through the sentiment focus technique before
feeding them into the FinBERT model significantly improves its per-
formance in sentiment analysis, especially for complex sentences
containing conflicting and contradicting sentiments.
One notable observation is the model’s increased performance
on sentences containing conjunctions such asbut, while, and though,
which our problem analysis showed, posed a significant challenge
to existing models.
In general, our fine-tuned model and the prior use of only the
sentiment-focus technique outperformed the original FinBERT in
accurately categorizing the sentiments in these sentences. This
improvement provides evidence that the SF sentence simplification
method helps the model better handle complexity and ambiguity,
which are common in such financial texts as published by the
FOMC.
The comparison between our fine-tuned model and the original
FinBERT model demonstrated an overall performance improvement
of 4.2 %. While this might seem minimal, it becomes significant
when considering the nature of our manually labeled test data set,
which consisted primarily of simple sentences. The impact of our
method becomes more prominent when applied only to complex
sentences, which typically pose a bigger challenge to sentiment
classification and were the focus of our research, as identified in
our problem analysis.
4.2 Implications of the Research
The results of this study have far-reaching implications for natural
language processing in financial contexts.
Financial texts are inherently complex due to a variety of factors.
They incorporate nuanced language and financial jargon, contain
multiple layers of meaning, and express uncertainty, subtlety, or
ambiguity. These complexities pose challenges to NLP models that
attempt to accurately understand and interpret financial texts. Meth-
ods such as ours that can improve a model’s ability to understand
such complex language are critical and provide new strategies for
addressing these challenges.
Furthermore, the study sheds light on the importance of cus-
tomization in NLP models and highlights the importance of con-
tinuous fine-tuning and testing to improve model performance. It
should be clear that while pre-trained models like FinBERT provide
a solid foundation for text analysis, there is often room for task-
specific improvements. By refining these models to better suit our
specific tasks and data, we can realize their full potential, which
can lead to more accurate and reliable results.
Moreover, the impact of our method goes beyond the immediate
task of sentiment analysis. The problem of understanding complex
sentences is common in various NLP applications in finance, such as
information extraction, document summarization, and forecasting.
By improving a model’s ability to handle complex sentences, our
method could potentially enhance the performance of these other
applications as well.
4.3 Limitations of the Study
Although our study has made significant efforts to improve senti-
ment analysis in FOMC Minutes’ sentences, we must acknowledge
its limitations.
Firstly, the absence of a large, pre-labeled dataset for training
and testing presented a challenge. We manually labeled a small data
set for evaluation purposes but this approach could not ensure the
completeness and diversity that a large, machine- or professionally
expert-labeled dataset might provide.
Secondly, while the process of manual labeling was valuable
for gaining context-specific understanding and insights, it also
introduced the potential for human error or bias. Even with the
utmost care, subjective judgment or inadvertent mistakes could
have affected the quality of the labels.
In addition, we identified only a subset of instances where Fin-
BERT made incorrect predictions. A more beneficial approach might
have been to collect a complete list of all cases that were predicted
incorrectly in a separate dataset for more detailed examination,
problem analysis, and model refinement.
Furthermore, our study was limited in its scope of model testing.
We used and fine-tuned FinBERT, but other models available in
the NLP landscape were not evaluated. Therefore, our findings and
methods might generalize to the performance of other models for
the same or similar tasks.
As another limitation of our study, we must acknowledge the
specificity of our data set. Our analysis was based only on the sen-
tences of the FOMC Minutes, which are written in a particular style
and structure. This specificity might limit the generalization of our
results to all types of financial documents, which can significantly
vary in terms of language use, length, structure, and complexity.
Moreover, our study addressed only one specific problem we
found in sentiment analysis in financial texts, namely complexity
and conflicting and contradicting sentiments after certain conjunc-
tions. Other issues inherent to financial documents, such as financial
lingo, remained unaddressed.
While the sentence simplification approach proved effective in
this study, it might not be universally applicable to all types of
financial texts. Different financial documents have their unique
linguistic characteristics, and further research is needed to test the
generalization of our method.
363


[Page 8]
ICAIF ’23, November 27–29, 2023, Brooklyn, NY, USA Ziwei Chen, Sandro Gössi, et al.
4.4 Future Work
The recognition of these limitations also offers opportunities for
future research to expand upon our work. By addressing these
constraints, we believe that continued research in this field of sen-
timent analysis for finance can yield even more promising results.
Our research has built on the earlier groundwork by Kim et al. [5]
and laid the foundation for several promising avenues of further
research in the future.
4.4.1 Use of Novel Models: BloombergGPT. While our research
has provided valuable insights into the potential of incorporat-
ing sentiment focus and fine-tuning the FinBERT model, which is
a state-of-the-art domain-specific NLP model for finance, it also
highlights the potential for exploring other advanced and novel
model methods for sentiment analysis. Cutting-edge NLP models
such as GPT-4 and BloombergGPT in combination with different
prompting techniques could be evaluated for their performance
on similar tasks and might even produce better results, allowing a
broader understanding of the strengths and weaknesses of different
approaches to financial sentiment analysis.
4.4.2 Address Additional Problems: Financial Lingo. Secondly, our
study only addressed one specific issue—the problem of complexity
in sentences featuring conjunctions and contradicting sentiments.
Future research could delve deeper into the various challenges
present in financial texts, such as a better understanding of finan-
cial language and jargon, where our problem analysis showed that
FinBERT also had difficulties. Scientists could, for example, fine-
tune FinBERT with a large amount of financial corpus from the
FOMC Minutes or similar financial texts that contain such expert
language. We are convinced that a follow-up analysis with a more
comprehensive and complete data set of FOMC Minutes’ sentences
would reveal more issues that could be addressed. Addressing these
additional problems could significantly enhance the performance
of NLP models like FinBERT in financial and task-specific contexts,
providing more nuanced and accurate sentiment analysis capabili-
ties.
4.4.3 Create Complete Data Set. Finally, future research could in-
volve the professional development of a comprehensive and accu-
rately labeled FOMC dataset. Our study was limited by the availabil-
ity of a labeled data set. The manual labeling process was tedious
work and extremely time- and energy-consuming. The creation of
a larger, more robust dataset with all 32K or even more specifically
selected individual sentences accurately labeled, could provide a
much stronger foundation for training and testing a variety of dif-
ferent NLP models and methods. This could also involve research
into exploring more objective and reliable processes and methods
for dataset labeling. A more representative data set would not only
enhance the reliability of individual studies but could also facilitate
more comprehensive comparisons between different NLP models
and techniques, as well as an overall faster research process.
5 CONCLUSION
This study examined the potential of refining FinBERT, a state-
of-the-art NLP model, for sentiment analysis of FOMC Minutes.
We have fine-tuned the FinBERT-FOMC model, a language model
based on enhanced sentiment analysis of FOMC meeting minutes.
It is more accurate than the original FinBERT for more complex
financial sentences.
Our method demonstrated promising results in enhancing Fin-
BERT’s sentiment classification performance through fine-tuning
and text simplification techniques such as sentiment focus. Despite
the original FinBERT’s commendable performance, our fine-tuned
model was able to capture nuanced sentiments in complex sentences
more accurately, achieving a notable increase in performance. So,
our strategy of simplifying complex sentences by focusing on the
core sentiment-bearing parts of the phrases has proven effective.
Although our research is limited by factors such as dataset size
and manual labeling, and only targets a specific problem in a specific
type of financial text, the results seem to be promising. Even though
the implications of this study extend beyond FOMC Minutes to a
broader financial context, it is important to highlight the importance
of continuous testing, fine-tuning, and innovation of NLP models
to better handle the complexity of the financial language.
Looking ahead, there are numerous opportunities for future
research, including testing other advanced models for sentiment
classification in financial texts, and developing more comprehensive
and reliable labeled datasets.
The journey to perfecting sentiment analysis in financial texts,
especially FOMC Minutes, is long. Still, this study marks a step
forward in the right direction and opens the door for potential
improvements in other financial text analysis tasks to provide better
insights and drive the enhancement of decision-making processes
in this society-critical field.
REFERENCES
[1] Dogu Araci. 2019. FinBERT: Financial Sentiment Analysis with Pre-trained Lan-
guage Models. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1908.10063 arXiv:1908.10063 [cs]
[2] Arthur Böök. 2019. Sentiment Analysis on FOMC Statements.
https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/sentiment-analysis-fomc-statements-arthur-
b%C3%B6%C3%B6k/
[3] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. 2019. BERT:
Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Language Understanding. In
Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and
Short Papers) (Minneapolis, Minnesota, 2019-06). Association for Computational
Linguistics, Minneapolis, Minnesota, 4171–4186. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/
N19-1423
[4] Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. 1997. Long Short-Term
Memory. Neural Computation 9, 8 (11 1997), 1735–1780. https:
//doi.org/10.1162/neco.1997.9.8.1735 arXiv:https://direct.mit.edu/neco/article-
pdf/9/8/1735/813796/neco.1997.9.8.1735.pdf
[5] Wonseong Kim, Jan Frederic Spörer, and Siegfried Handschuh. 2023. An-
alyzing FOMC Minutes: Accuracy and Constraints of Language Models.
arXiv:2304.10164 [cs] https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.10164
[6] Alec Radford and Karthik Narasimhan. 2018. Improving Language Understanding
by Generative Pre-Training. https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:49313245
[7] Morgan Stanley. 2023. Our Patented Fed Sentiment Indicator. https://www.
morganstanley.com/articles/mnlpfeds-sentiment-index-federal-reserve
[8] Raul Cruz Tadle. 2022. FOMC Minutes Sentiments and Their Impact on Financial
Markets. Journal of Economics and Business 118 (2022), 106021. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jeconbus.2021.106021
[9] Tomokuni Higano, Shuxin Yang, and Akio Sashida. 2023. Machine Learning and
FOMC Statements: What’s the Sentiment? https://blogs.cfainstitute.org/investor/
2023/01/18/machine-learning-and-fomc-statements-whats-the-sentiment/
[10] Yifei Wang. 2023. Aspect-Based Sentiment Analysis in Document – FOMC
Meeting Minutes on Economic Projection. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2108.
04080 arXiv:2108.04080 [cs]
[11] Yi Yang, Mark Christopher Siy UY, and Allen Huang. 2020. FinBERT: A Pretrained
Language Model for Financial Communications. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.
2006.08097 arXiv:2006.08097 [cs]
[12] Keane Ong Yang Wei, Andrew Walker, Yan Qi Ho, Shah Dhruv, and Jacob
Pang Jiarong. 2022. NLP on FOMC Meetings. https://medium.com/@nusfintech.
ml/nlp-on-fomc-meetings-50b48c447fe1
364