[Page 1]
FinLlama: Financial Sentiment Classification for
Algorithmic Trading Applications
Thanos Konstantinidis1, Giorgos Iacovides 1,2, Mingxue Xu 1, Tony G. Constantinides 1, Danilo Mandic 1
1Imperial College London, 2MIT
{a.konstantinidis16, giorgos.iacovides20, m.xu21, a.constantinides, d.mandic }@imperial.ac.uk
Abstract—There are multiple sources of financial news online
which influence market movements and trader’s decisions. This
highlights the need for accurate sentiment analysis, in addition
to having appropriate algorithmic trading techniques, to arrive
at better informed trading decisions. Standard lexicon based
sentiment approaches have demonstrated their power in aiding
financial decisions. However, they are known to suffer from issues
related to context sensitivity and word ordering. Large Language
Models (LLMs) can also be used in this context, but they are
not finance-specific and tend to require significant computational
resources. To facilitate a finance specific LLM framework, we
introduce a novel approach based on the Llama 2 7B foundational
model, in order to benefit from its generative nature and compre-
hensive language manipulation. This is achieved by fine-tuning
the Llama2 7B model on a small portion of supervised financial
sentiment analysis data, so as to jointly handle the complexities
of financial lexicon and context, and further equipping it with
a neural network based decision mechanism. Such a generator-
classifier scheme, referred to as FinLlama, is trained not only to
classify the sentiment valence but also quantify its strength, thus
offering traders a nuanced insight into financial news articles.
Complementing this, the implementation of parameter-efficient
fine-tuning through LoRA optimises trainable parameters, thus
minimising computational and memory requirements, without
sacrificing accuracy. Simulation results demonstrate the ability
of the proposed FinLlama to provide a framework for enhanced
portfolio management decisions and increased market returns.
These results underpin the ability of FinLlama to construct high-
return portfolios which exhibit enhanced resilience, even during
volatile periods and unpredictable market events.
Index Terms - Large language models, finance, sentiment
analysis, algorithmic trading, parameter-efficient fine-tuning
I. I NTRODUCTION
The ever increasing prominence of algorithmic trading in
quantitative finance has necessitated the need for reliable and
actionable AI-aided intelligence from vast streams of data with
multiple modalities. Of particular interest is generative AI, ow-
ing to its ability to distill insights from non-numerical sources
such as news, earnings calls, financial reports, and other textual
sources. In this context, sentiment analysis promises to bridge
the gap between market movements caused by geopolitical and
socioeconomic events, human actions, and quantitative trading.
Sentiment analysis rests upon the quantification of opinions
present in unlabeled textual data, and aims to categorize
whether the overall viewpoint is positive, negative, or neutral.
When applied to large-scale information sources, this may
yield an understanding of the overall direction of macroscopic
trends, a task which is both challenging and time-consuming
for human analysts. Importantly, the sentiment contained in
on-line textual sources can drive market movements; such
information harbours intrinsic advantages and a competitive
edge to those equipped with the tools to harness it.
Despite conceptual benefits, the heterogeneous, nuanced,
and vast nature of financial text presents unique challenges
when it comes to extracting sentiment in a manner that is both
accurate and actionable. For example, the words ‘bull’ and
‘bear’ are neutral in the general vocabulary, but in financial
markets, their respective connotations are strictly positive
or negative [1]. This highlights the need for context-aware
sentiment extraction, and underpins the complexities of natural
language processing (NLP) in financial applications.
To adress these issues, we consider a two-fold fundamental
question:
• Can large language models (LLMs), which have revolu-
tionized manifold areas of NLP, be specifically tailored
for sentiment analysis in the finance domain, particularly
for algorithmic trading?
• Can this tailoring be achieved in a way which does
not require the vast computational resources, typically
associated with NLP models, thus making the approach
accessible to a broader audience equipped with standard
computational resources?
.
Our proposed FinLlama is one such solution, which is
obtained by fine-tuning a pre-trained LLM (namely Llama 2
7B [2]) on specialised, labelled and publicly available financial
news datasets. The ultimate goal of FinLlama is to enhance the
performance of financial sentiment analysis, whilst leveraging
on parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) and 8-bit quantiza-
tion, through LoRA [3], to minimise resource utilisation.
The main contributions of this work are:
• Targeted fine-tuning : Rather than utilising one over-
arching model for diverse financial tasks, our approach
capitalizes on the foundational pre-trained Llama 2
model, whereby fine-tuning is performed specifically for
the purpose of sentiment classification through a SoftMax
classification layer at its output.
• Efficient resource utilization: Our approach ensures that
even standard computational resources, with no high-end
GPUs, can be employed. By virtue of the pre-trained
Llama 2 model and through targeted parameter-efficient
fine-tuning, we dramatically reduce computational de-
mands compared to the existing methods, thus bridging
1
arXiv:2403.12285v1  [cs.CL]  18 Mar 2024


[Page 2]
the gap between academic benchmarks and practical
utility.
• Benchmarking and real-world application: The success
of fine-tuned LLMs for finance has also highlighted
that the domain of portfolio construction has not yet
been adequately addressed. To this end, we integrate the
extracted sentiment signals by FinLlama into a long-
short portfolio, which allows us to obtain finance-specific
real-world metrics including cumulative returns and the
Sharpe ratio.
II. R ELATED WORK
The potential of sentiment analysis in finance was first
recognised by Fama who, in 1970, introduced the notion of
the Efficient Market Hypothesis (EMH) [4], which states that
stock prices change in response to unexpected fundamental
information and news. In this context, before the introduction
of advanced machine learning tools, the financial sector em-
ployed lexicon-driven approaches [1]. These methods analyse
textual content, sourced from news articles or financial disclo-
sures, based on specific keywords, which are then linked to
established sentiment ratings [5], [6]. However, an exponential
increase in the volume and richness of available information
has opened a fertile ground for machine learning, including
techniques such as Naive Bayes and Support Vector Machines
[7], which are summarised in Figure 1.
In parallel, the advances in deep learning have become
instrumental for NLP research and have spurred pioneering
works that sought to harness the power of neural networks
for NLP tasks. Recently, the introduction of the attention
mechanism and transformer networks has enabled a signif-
icant shift away from recurrent and convolutional methods,
traditionally used in deep-learning tasks [8]. This has led to
the development of transformer-based models, such as BERT
[9], which owing to its contextual comprehension of language
has been used extensively for sentiment analysis. However, the
performance of BERT in the financial domain has encountered
limitations, primarily because it is not specifically trained on
financial datasets. Moreover, its requirement for substantial
amounts of data for fine-tuning purposes poses a considerable
challenge for financial applications, where such data may not
be readily available.
More recently, FinBERT [10], a version of BERT which is
fine-tuned on financial text, has shown promising results for
the task of financial sentiment analysis. However, FinBERT
still suffers from limitations such as insensitivity to numerical
values, while due to its relatively small size (110 million pa-
rameters) its classification accuracy deteriorates with sentence
complexity [11]. The FinGPT [12], [13] and Instruct-FinGPT
[14] aim to enhance their expressive power by using the Llama
7B as their base model. However, FinGPT is not optimized for
the task of financial sentiment analysis whilst Instruct-FinGPT
only classifies the sentiment valence but is not capable of
quantifying the strength of a sentiment class.
To the best of our knowledge, BloombergGPT [15] is the
only pre-trained finance-specific LLM, as Bloomberg was able
to train the model using data collected over a span of 40
years. Despite the impressive performance of the model on
financial sentiment analysis, the resources required to train
such a model are substantial (1.3M GPU hours at a cost of
$5M) whilst much of the training data is confidential and
not publicly available. This is different from our proposed
methodology, which focuses on achieving a high classification
accuracy whilst minimizing the training corpus and computa-
tional resources. This is achieved by fine-tuning a pre-trained
general-purpose LLM on a smaller-scale financial data corpus.
III. M ETHODOLOGY
Our work aims to embark upon the immense expressive
power and contextual understanding of general-purpose LLMs
in order to make them finance-specific. This is achieved by
fine-tuning the state-of-the-art (SOTA) Llama 2 7B model on
a specific corpus of financial data. The effectiveness of our
model is demonstrated on financial sentiment analysis through
a new set of benchmarks that align closely with end portfolio
construction - the ultimate goal of financial analysis.
A. Fine-tuning the Llama 2 model
Even though pre-trained LLMs pose a range of capabilities
such as reasoning, translation, summarising and text genera-
tion, they often struggle when applied to a specific task of
interest, such as sentiment analysis. This limitation becomes
even more critical in the finance domain, where the nuanced
language, media hype and extensive length of financial news
articles pose significant additional challenges.
To tackle these challenges, our work revisits the first prin-
ciples of LLMs in order to align them to the task of financial
sentiment analysis. This is achieved by using four labelled
financial text datasets as training data to fine-tune the Llama
2 model. Such training on financial data, equipped the model
with the ability to understand the linguistic nuances present in
the financial domain. Furthermore, a SoftMax classification
layer was added at the output of the foundational model,
allowing the proposed fine-tuned model to produce SoftMax
outputs for three labels: positive, negative or neutral. This
made it possible to alter the primary function of the model
from text generation to sentiment classification.
1) Training datasets: Our training data was a combination
of four labelled publicly available financial news datasets,
resulting in a comprehensive collection of 34,180 labelled
samples. Each sample was annotated with one of the three
labels: positive, negative, and neutral.
2) Model Training: Our FinLlama model was first ini-
tialised with the Llama 2 7B model, followed by fine-tuning
over 5 epochs. The training process utilised the AdamW
optimizer [16], as it effectively decouples the weight decay
from the optimization steps, leading to more effective training.
The initial learning rate was deliberately kept small as the
Llama 2 7B model is already pre-trained on a large corpus
of data, whilst the warm-up ratio and weight decay served as
key regularisation techniques to prevent overfitting, a crucial
aspect given the limited size of our fine-tuning dataset.
2


[Page 3]
Fig. 1: Overview of sentiment analysis methods.
Moreover, the LoRA implementation was employed in
the fine-tuning process in order to minimize the number of
trainable parameters whilst achieving high and robust end
performance. Through the LoRA implementation, the number
of trainable parameters was set to 4.2M, amounting to just
0.0638% of the total number of parameters in the Llama 2 7B
model. This made it possible for our fine-tuning process to be
implemented on a single A100 (40 GB) GPU, thus avoiding
the need for excessive computational resources.
B. Proposed Framework
With the proposed fine-tuned Llama 2 model in place, we
followed the framework shown in Figure 2. Our aim was to
assess the performance of our FinLlama model against other
established sentiment analysis methods, using finance-specific
real-world metrics.
Fig. 2: Framework for sentiment analysis.
Data Collection and Processing. Both textual and market
data were collected in order to construct appropriate long-short
(L/S) portfolios. Regarding the textual data, 204,017 articles
dating between 2015 to 2021 were collected from online
sources. These sources were selected due to their reliability,
reputation, lack of bias and focus on major corporations.
Financial market data were collected for the same time period
from Yahoo Finance. These collected market data contained
daily stock returns for the 500 companies in our Investable
Universe (S&P 500), resulting in 1,672 days of stock returns
data for each company. Data processing in the form of Named
Entity Recognition (NER) and text pre-processing was then
applied to the textual data, to remove irrelevant articles and
ensure the compatibility of the articles with our sentiment
methdods.
Sentiment Analysis. In total, five sentiment analysis meth-
ods were applied. For the lexicon-based approaches (see Ap-
pendix VI-A1), LMD [17] and HIV-4 [18] were implemented
using the pysentiment2 Python library, while V ADER [19]
was implemented using the NLTK library. Regarding the deep
learning methods (see Appendix VI-B), both the FinBERT
model and our FinLlama model were obtained through Hug-
gingFace, and were utilised via the Transformers library.
The considered methods were evaluated on every article
within each corpus for a given company. In cases where
multiple articles were published on the same day for a given
company, the average sentiment was calculated for that day,
in the form
St = 1
Nt
NtX
i=1
Sit (1)
Here, St represents the average sentiment for the t-th day,
Nt denotes the number of news articles published on that
same t-th day for a given company, while Sit designates the
sentiment strength of the i-th news article on a particular t-
th day. The daily sentiment outputs for each company were
merged to arrive at the final sentiment data that were utilised
as a parameter in the portfolio construction stage.
3


[Page 4]
Portfolio Construction. Once the sentiment for each
method was defined for every company, the long-short port-
folio was constructed. We used the sentiment as a parameter
to determine which companies should be in a long or short
position, aiming to maximise returns from both positions.
The long-short portfolio was constructed using the following
procedure:
• Define the Investable Universe: Even though the S&P
500 comprises 500 companies, the financial textual data
collected did not contain articles associated to some of the
companies for the test period of February 2015 to June
2021. Consequently, 417 companies were considered.
• Define the long and short position : The sentiment sig-
nal obtained from each of the five methods was used
to construct five distinct portfolios. For each method,
companies were ranked daily according to their senti-
ment. Companies that did not have sentiment data on a
particular day were omitted from the ranking. As the daily
sentiment score for each company ranges between -1 and
1, those with the highest positive sentiment were placed
in long positions, whilst those with the strongest negative
sentiment were placed in short positions.
• Allocation: An equally-weighted portfolio strategy was
considered in our portfolio construction as this is the strat-
egy mostly utilised by hedge funds [20]. The percentage
of companies in a long and short position was fixed at
35%. Consequently, the top 35% of companies in terms
of performance were allocated to long positions, while
the bottom 35% were allocated to short positions.
• Determine daily returns: The daily return for each com-
pany that was held in a long or short position was
obtained by the market data on that particular day. The
total daily return of companies that were held in a long
position was defined as
Daily Long Return r long =
NlongX
i=1
rlong(i)
Nlong
(2)
Similarly, the total daily return of companies that were
held in a short position was defined as
Daily Short Return r short =
NshortX
i=1
rshort(i)
Nshort
(3)
For each particular day, the number of companies that
were held in either a long position ( Nlong) or a short
position ( Nshort) were equal. Consequently, the total
portfolio return on a particular day was the difference
between the daily long return and daily short return, and
is given by
Daily Return r daily(i) = rlong(i) − rshort(i) (4)
Portfolio Evaluation. The performance of the portfolio con-
structed using our fine-tuned model was assessed against the
portfolios constructed using other SOTA sentiment methods.
To this end, the employed real-world financial metrics were:
cumulative returns, annualized return, annualized volatility,
and the Sharpe ratio [21]. These metrics are defined as
Cumulative Returns r cum =
NX
i=1
rdaily(i) (5)
Annualized Return R p =
NX
i=1
rlog(i)
N × 252 (6)
Ann. V olatility σ p =
s PN
i=1(rlog(i) − ¯r)2
N − 1 ×
√
252 (7)
Sharpe Ratio S a = Rp − Rf
σp
(8)
where N is the total number of investing days, totaling 1,672,
rlog(i) is the logarithmic daily return, ¯r is the average daily
logarithmic return, Rf is the annualized risk-free rate of return
and 252 is the number of business days in a year. The risk-
free return, Rf , typically represents the yield of the 10-Year
Treasury Note; however, due to its prolonged low yield [22]
during the analysed period, a 0% rate is commonly used and
is adopted in our analysis.
IV. E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS
The performance of the five portfolios which were con-
structed as described in Section III are shown in Figure 3.
Observe that the deep learning approaches outperformed the
lexicon-based approaches in terms of cumulative returns, par-
ticularly those relying on general-purpose dictionaries (HIV-4
and V ADER). This was to be expected, given that lexicon-
based approaches often fail to capture the contextual meaning
of sentences, whilst the nuanced nature of financial text signif-
icantly reduces the accuracy of general-purpose dictionaries.
Furthermore, as observed in the bottom-left panel of Figure 3,
all methods exhibited their best performance during turbulent
and high-volatility economic periods, such as the first quarter
of 2020. The results observed in Table II suggest that the 35%
long-short portfolio, constructed using our fine-tuned Llama-2
model, was the most successful. This is attributed to its ability
to achieve significantly higher cumulative returns compared to
all other considered methods, and most importantly FinBERT,
while attaining a higher Sharpe ratio and exhibiting lower
volatility.
Overall, our FinLlama model successfully generated sig-
nificantly higher returns for investors, whilst simultaneously
reducing portfolio risk, as indicated by the higher Sharpe ratio
and lower annualized volatility.
V. C ONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We have introduced an innovative approach to financial sen-
timent analysis which rests upon the fine-tuning of a general-
purpose LLM. In this way, the proposed method has capi-
talised on the extensive knowledge base and reasoning abilities
inherent to LLMs, whilst shifting their primary objective from
4


[Page 5]
Fig. 3: Comparison of performance of the 35% long-short portfolios which were constructed using the five sentiment analysis
methods, for the time period of February 2015 to June 2021. MA(30) and MSTD(30) represent the moving average and moving
standard deviation, respectively, of the returns calculated over a 30-day rolling window.
LMD HIV-4 V ADER FinBERT FinLlama (Ours) S&P 500
Cumulative Returns (%) 204.6 100.4 130.6 213.0 308.2 83.1
Annualized Return (%) 29.1 13.5 17.9 30.3 45.0 11.3
Sharpe Ratio 1.5 0.7 0.9 1.5 2.4 0.62
Annualized V olatility (%) 19.5 18.9 19.6 20.3 18.6 18.5
TABLE I: Statistical comparison between the five considered sentiment analysis methods using a 35% long-short portfolio.
For Cumulative Returns, Annualized Return and Sharpe Ratio, higher is better. For Annualized V olatility, lower is better.
text generation to classification tasks. In addition, such an
approach has enabled the LLMs to become more attuned to
the nuanced language of the finance sector, whilst minimising
their resource utilisation and computational demands.
Our fine-tuned Llama2 7B model, termed FinLlama, has
been used to construct a portfolio, yielding results that have
surpassed those of the leading current method in the field,
the FinBERT. The FinLlama has achieved cumulative returns
which have outperformed the FinBERT model by 44.7%,
while achieving a significantly higher Sharpe ratio and lower
annualized volatility. This represents both a substantial contri-
bution to the field of a conjoint framework involving sentiment
analysis and LLMs, and demonstrates that fine-tuning an LLM
can yield superior results, even with a small amount of task-
specific data. In addition, the present work has set a new
benchmark in the field, transcending traditional measures such
as accuracy and F1-score, commonly used in the literature.
Instead, we focus on practical, finance-specific metrics which
have greater relevance to end-users. It is our hope that such
an approach is a step towards narrowing down the divide
between academic research and practical applications within
quantitative finance.
Our future research will aim to enhance both the sentiment
classification accuracy and efficiency of our model by incor-
porating additional techniques to produce an easily tractable
platform to facilitate the application of artificial intelligence
(AI) in the finance sector.
Disclaimer: Nothing herein is financial advice, and NOT
a recommendation to trade real money. Please use common
sense and always first consult a professional before trading
5


[Page 6]
or investing.
REFERENCES
[1] K. Mishev, A. Gjorgjevikj, I. V odenska, L. T. Chitkushev, and D. Tra-
janov, “Evaluation of sentiment analysis in finance: From lexicons to
transformers,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 131 662–131 682, 07 2020.
[2] H. Touvron, L. Martin, K. Stone, P. Albert, A. Almahairi, Y . Babaei,
N. Bashlykov, S. Batra, P. Bhargava, S. Bhosale et al. , “Llama
2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.
[3] E. J. Hu, Y . Shen, P. Wallis, Z. Allen-Zhu, Y . Li, S. Wang, L. Wang,
and W. Chen, “LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of large language models,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.09685 , 2021.
[4] E. F. Fama, “Efficient capital markets: A review of theory and empirical
work,” The Journal of Finance , vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 383–417, 1970.
[5] X. Li, H. Xie, L. Chen, J. Wang, and X. Deng, “News impact on stock
price return via sentiment analysis,” Knowledge-Based Systems, vol. 69,
pp. 14–23, 2014.
[6] Z. T. Ke, B. T. Kelly, and D. Xiu, “Predicting returns with text data,”
National Bureau of Economic Research, Tech. Rep., 2019.
[7] N. Cristianini and J. Shawe-Taylor, An introduction to support vector
machines and other kernel-based learning methods . Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 2000.
[8] Z. Yang, D. Yang, C. Dyer, X. He, A. Smola, and E. Hovy, “Hierarchical
attention networks for document classification,” 01 2016, pp. 1480–1489.
[9] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “BERT: Pre-training
of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” in North
American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics ,
2019. [Online]. Available: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
52967399
[10] D. Araci, “FinBERT: Financial sentiment analysis with pre-trained
language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.10063 , 2019.
[11] Z. Chen, S. G ¨ossi, W. Kim, B. Bermeitinger, and S. Handschuh,
“FinBERT-FOMC: Fine-tuned FinBERT Model with sentiment focus
method for enhancing sentiment analysis of FOMC minutes.” Pro-
ceedings of the 4th ACM International Conference on AI in Finance,
2023, pp. 357–364.
[12] X.-Y . Liu, G. Wang, and D. Zha, “FinGPT: Democratizing internet-
scale data for financial large language models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2307.10485, 2023.
[13] H. Yang, X.-Y . Liu, and C. D. Wang, “FinGPT: Open-source financial
large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.06031 , 2023.
[14] B. Zhang, H. Yang, and X.-Y . Liu, “Instruct-FinGPT: Financial
sentiment analysis by instruction tuning of general-purpose large
language models,” ArXiv, vol. abs/2306.12659, 2023. [Online].
Available: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:259224880
[15] S. Wu, O. Irsoy, S. Lu, V . Dabravolski, M. Dredze, S. Gehrmann,
P. Kambadur, D. Rosenberg, and G. Mann, “BloombergGPT: A
large language model for finance,” ArXiv, vol. abs/2303.17564,
2023. [Online]. Available: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
257833842
[16] I. Loshchilov and F. Hutter, “Fixing weight decay regularization
in Adam,” ArXiv, vol. abs/1711.05101, 2017. [Online]. Available:
https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:3312944
[17] T. Loughran and B. Mcdonald, “When is a liability not a liability?
Textual analysis, dictionaries, and 10-Ks,” The Journal of Finance ,
vol. 66, pp. 35 – 65, 02 2011.
[18] P. J. Stone, D. C. Dunphy, M. S. Smith, and D. M. Ogilvie, The General
Inquirer: A Computer Approach to Content Analysis. MIT Press, 1966.
[19] C. Hutto and E. Gilbert, “V ADER: A parsimonious rule-based model for
sentiment analysis of social media text,” vol. 08, no. 01. Proceedings of
the 8th International Conference on Weblogs and Social Media, ICWSM
2014, 2015, pp. 216–225.
[20] Z. T. Ke, B. T. Kelly, and D. Xiu, “Predicting returns with text data,”
National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc, NBER Working Papers
26186, 2019. [Online]. Available: https://EconPapers.repec.org/RePEc:
nbr:nberwo:26186
[21] J. B. Berk and P. M. DeMarzo, “Corporate finance,” vol. 5, 2019.
[22] Yahoo Finance, “Treasury yield 10 years historical data.” 2023.
[Online]. Available: https://finance.yahoo.com/quote/%5ETNX/history
VI. A PPENDIX
A. Lexicon-Based Approaches
1) Harvard IV-4 Psychological Dictionary (HIV-4): HIV-4
is one of the oldest manually constructed lexicons, and is
used for objectively identifying specified characteristics of
messages in areas involving social science, political science,
and psychology. The latest version of the HIV-4 dictionary
contains over 11,000 words which are classified into one or
more of 183 categories. In this work, we focus on the 1,045
words labelled as positive and the 1,160 words labelled as
negative.
2) Loughran and McDonald (LMD) Dictionary: Loughran
and McDonald evaluated standard dictionaries and found that
these frequently misclassify terms within financial texts. This
insight led to the development of the LMD dictionary, which
is specifically tailored for the financial sector. The dictionary
categorizes words into six distinct sentiment categories:
negative, positive, uncertainty, litigious, strong modal, and
weak modal. It was constructed using data from 50,115
10-K filings from 8,341 firms listed on the New York Stock
Exchange (NYSE) and the National Association of Securities
Dealers Automated Quotations (NASDAQ), covering the
period from 1994 to 2008. Overall, the LMD dictionary
contains 2,355 negative financial words and 353 positive
financial words.
3) Valence Aware Dictionary for sEntiment Reasoning
(VADER): V ADER combines lexical features, derived from
micro-blog contexts, with the grammatical and syntactical
conventions that humans typically employ to express or em-
phasize sentiment intensity. This enables V ADER to accurately
quantify the sentiment strength of text. The model contains
approximately 9,000 token features, which are each assigned a
sentiment score ranging from -4 (indicating extremely negative
sentiment) to +4 (indicating extremely positive sentiment). The
overall polarity score for a text is calculated by summing the
sentiment scores of each word present in the lexicon, with the
final score normalized to fall within the range of -1 to +1.
B. Deep Learning Approaches
1) FinBERT: FinBERT leverages the BERT model architec-
ture, and is specifically tailored for financial contexts. It was
pre-trained on a substantial financial text corpus consisting of
1.8M news articles sourced from the Thomson Reuters Text
Research Collection (TRC2) dataset, spanning the years be-
tween 2008 to 2010. Further refinement was achieved through
fine-tuning on the Financial Phrasebank (FPB) dataset, thus
enhancing its capabilities in financial sentiment classification.
FinBERT generates SoftMax outputs for three labels: positive,
negative, and neutral.
6