[Page 1]
Multimodal Financial Foundation Models (MFFMs):
Progress, Prospects, and Challenges
Xiao-Yang Liu Yanglet
Columbia University
New York, NY, USA
XL2427@columbia.edu
Yupeng Cao
Stevens Institute of Technology
Hoboken, NJ, USA
caoyupeng.work@gmail.com
Li Deng
University of Washington
Seattle, WA, USA
deng629@gmail.com
Multimodal Financial DataMultimodal Financial Applications
Audio
Visual
Text
Tabular
MFFM Exploration 
Market 
Multimodal Financial Foundation Model
Challenges
Auditing
  First-hand experiences through case study 
  Progress 
          Benchmark 
          Models 
          Datasets
  Propespect
          Reasoning Models
          Fine-tuning and quantization methods
          Customizing to use scenarios
          Multimodal retrieval-augment generation
          Mixture of Experts (MoE)
          Federated learning
Multimodal FinData
Training and inference costs
Model auditing
Hallucination and misinformation
Guardrail framework
Credit Scoring
Earning conference calls 
NumberMonetary policy conferences 
Financial reports 
Chart
Market data
Financial news
Search Agent
 Robo-Advisor 
Report Generation
Compliance
(Data-centric approach)(Agentic FinAI ecosystem) (FinAI readiness)
Future Directions
Multimodal and multilingual 
Open leaderboard
Zero-Knowledge Proofs and Blockchain
Open question sets and datasets
AI Tutor
Trading
Alternative data
Curriculum and Certifications
FinAgent powered by FinGPT
Low-code
  Open Models
  Open Code
  Open Data
Content
Tools
(Local / Remote)
MCP, A2A
ANP, ACP
…
OpenMDW
 MOF/MOT
Figure 1: An overview. Multimodal financial data (left block) is ubiquitous in real life, while financial applications (middle
block) require financial agents to possess multimodal capabilities, such as search, tutor, robo-advisor, compliance, auditing,
trading, and low-code development. However, the urgent need for MFFM models (right block) call for immediate actions, in
order to achieve FinAI readiness and governance.
Abstract
Financial Large Language Models (FinLLMs), such as open Fin-
GPT and proprietary BloombergGPT, have demonstrated great
potential in select areas of financial services. Beyond this earlier
language-centric approach, Multimodal Financial Foundation Mod-
els (MFFMs) can digest interleaved multimodal financial data, in-
cluding fundamental data, market data, data analytics, macroeco-
nomic, and alternative data (e.g., natural language, audio, images,
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ICAIF 24, Nov. 15, NY, USA
© 2024 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-x-xxxx-xxxx-x/YY/MM
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnn.nnn
and video). In this position paper, presented at the MFFM Workshop
joined with the ACM International Conference on AI in Finance
(ICAIF) 2024, we describe the progress, prospects, and challenges of
MFFMs. This paper also highlights ongoing research in the Secure-
FinAI Lab1 at Columbia University and summarizes the FinLLM
Exploration meetings at FinOS of Linux Foundation. MFFMs will
enable users to better understand the underlying complexity as-
sociated with numerous financial tasks and data, simplifying the
operation of financial services and investment processes.
Github: https://github.com/Open-Finance-Lab/Awesome-MFFMs/
ACM Reference Format:
Xiao-Yang Liu Yanglet, Yupeng Cao, and Li Deng. 2024. Multimodal Financial
Foundation Models (MFFMs): Progress, Prospects, and Challenges. In Inter-
national Workshop on Multimodal Financial Foundation Models (MFFMs) at
ACM International Conference on AI in Finance (MFFM at ICAIF), Nov. 14–17,
2024,. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 21 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/nnn.nnn
1https://openfin.engineering.columbia.edu/
arXiv:2506.01973v2  [cs.CE]  12 Jul 2025


[Page 2]
ICAIF 24, Nov. 15, NY, USA Xiao-Yang Liu Yanglet, Yupeng Cao, and Li Deng
1 Introduction
The general public could not afford a private lunch with billionaire
Warren Buffett. What about hiring Buffett as my on-call financial
advisor, possibly at a cost of $100? Before finalizing an investment of
$50 million, how about holding an elite brainstorming session with the
world’s 10 greatest investors?...at a cost of $5000?... Not many years
later, as he earned his first $1 million from investment, Yanglet was to
remember that night when Dr. Li Deng helped him revise the proposal
for the Multimodal Financial Foundation Models (MFFMs) workshop.
Generative AI is witnessing the rise of foundation models (e.g.,
transformer neural network, diffusion models) trained on massive
data that can be adapted to a wide range of downstream tasks
[3]. Recently, large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated
remarkable proficiency in understanding and generating human-
like texts. FinLLMs, such as open FinGPT [ 37, 42, 70, 88, 93, 94]
and proprietary BloombergGPT [82], have shown great potential
in select areas of financial services [ 26, 27]. Beyond this earlier
language-centric approach, Multimodal Financial Foundation Mod-
els (MFFMs) can process interleaved multimodal financial data,
including fundamental data, market data, data analytics, macroe-
conomics, and alternative data (e.g. natural language, audio, vi-
sual). Multimodal financial data has unique characteristics, such
as dynamic, both structured and unstructured forms, and comes in
varying formats (e.g., charts, graphs, Web APIs, Excel spreadsheets,
SEC filings [23], XBRL filings [21], and SQL data [95]).
On the journey toward widespread adoption of MFFMs, several
challenges remain, including increasing concerns related to repro-
ducibility, transparency, privacy, and ethics. First, many existing
LLMs function as black boxes, posing challenges in comprehending
their operations and ensuring fairness. Another two major chal-
lenges are “model cannibalism" and “openwashing. " Many models
are largely trained and released without transparency in mind, e.g.,
the Claude 3.5 Sonnet. Many supposedly "novel" models may exploit
labels from existing LLMs (e.g., GPT-4o) and perform supervised
learning, referred to as “model cannibalism. " As a result, MFFMs are
opaque in decision-making. They give rise to various challenges,
such as inadequate transparency in training data, deficiencies in
combating models’ inherent biases, safety and security issues, and
adversarial attacks (for example, backdoor attacks).
Recently, there have been many “openwashing" behaviors, where
the LLM weights are marketed as "open" but under restricted li-
censes, while OSI-approved licenses (e.g., Apache License 2.0 and
MIT License) are preferable. A research alliance between Columbia
University, Oxford University, and the Linux Foundation proposed
the Model Openness Framework [79] that classifies model openness
by ranking models according to 16 components. This framework
offers guidance to researchers and model producers for promoting
transparency and reproducibility. MFFMs that comply with this
framework would promote reproducibility and adoption across
the finance industry, such as Open FinLLMs [85]. For financial in-
stitutions, it provides clear guidelines for new models to become
commercially suitable without restrictions.
In this position paper, presented at the MFFM Workshop2 jointly
held with ACM International Conference on AI in Finance (ICAIF)
2MFFM Workshop: https://sites.google.com/view/iwmffm2024/home?authuser=1
2024, we describe the progress, prospects, and challenges of MFFMs.
This paper also highlights ongoing research in the SecureFinAI
Lab at Columbia University and and summarizes the FinLLM Ex-
ploration meetings at FinOS of Linux Foundation. We first list
multimodal financial data and data-centric approach in the finan-
cial domain (left block of Fig. 1). Then, we describe multimodal
financial applications (middle block of Fig. 1). We envision that
FinAgent is a promising solution to build multiple financial appli-
cations. Following the Model Openness Framework, open licenses
(e.g. OpenMDW3) and agent protocols (e.g. Model Context Protocol,
Agent2Agent Protocol) enables the blooming of an agentic FinAI
ecosystem. However, several major challenges (right block of Fig.
1) call for immediate actions in order to achieve FinAI readiness.
The associated challenges are proprietary data constraints, training
and inference costs, regulatory complexities, reasoning capacity,
and the need for robust benchmarks and a guardrail framework to
address misinformation and data biases. We believe that MFFMs
will enable promising financial tasks and data analysis, streamlining
the operation of financial services.
Related Work: Several related surveys are given in Table 1. Li
et al. [32] first reviewed the approach employing LLMs in finance.
Ding et al. [14] summarized the performance of LLM-based agents
in financial trading tasks. Lee et al. [29] reviewed FinLLMs from a
benchmark perspective. Kong et al. [26] and Kong et al. [27] further
summarize recent advancements in FinLLMs and discuss their vari-
ous application scenarios. Despite these efforts, the rapidly evolving
nature of the field necessitates an updated and thorough review of
multimodal financial data, applications, and models. Furthermore,
there is still a need for an in-depth analysis concerning the oppor-
tunities and challenges of applying LLMs in finance, including their
current readiness level.
Contributions: We summarize the contributions as follows:
• To the best of our knowledge, this is the first comprehensive sur-
vey of MFFMs. We summarize three aspects, multimodal financial
data, applications, and model exploration.
• For multimodal financial data, we emphasize a data-centric ap-
proach. For applications, we point out the promising era of an
agentic AI ecosystem with various types of FinAgents, which is
enabled by open models and agent protocols.
• We compare and contrast MFFMs with LLMs, FinLLMs, and MM-
LLMs. Our aim is to offer readers a holistic view of the MFFM de-
velopment lifecycle and help readers understand current progress
and future prospects.
• We describe the opportunities and point out the challenges when
applying MFFMs in the financial domain, including proprietary
data and digital regulatory reporting.
• We discuss ethical challenges of MFFMs’s readiness, including
the hallucination and misinformation in use scenarios, as well as
the importance of building a guardrail framework.
Well, using an MFFM base model, one could fine-tune a “Warren Buf-
fett" agent4 using the FinLoRA method [ 72] as well as QLoRA method
[13] by feeding multimodal data [ 37, 42], e.g., Buffett‘s conference
transcripts, audio, video, interviews, and the fine-tuning cost would
be less than $100. On the other hand, by specifying the preferred
3https://openmdw.ai/
4Demo of Buffet agent: https://finlora-docs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/intro/demo.html


[Page 3]
Multimodal Financial Foundation Models (MFFMs):
Progress, Prospects, and Challenges ICAIF 24, Nov. 15, NY, USA
Survey Date FinLLMs Benchmark Applications Challenges Multimodal Readiness/Governance
Li et al. [32] Nov. 2023 " % ❏ ❏ % %
Ding et al. [14] Jul. 2024 % % ❏ ❏ % %
Lee et al. [29] Apr. 2024 " " ❏ ❏ % %
Kong et al. [26, 27] Late 2024 " " " ❏ ❏ %
This Survey Jan. 2025 " " " " " "
Table 1: Overview of related surveys. The square indicates that the topic was covered but not comprehensive.
Types Text Audio Image Video Numbers Tabular Chart Time-Series
Earnings Conference Calls (ECC) " "
Monetary Policy Calls (MPC) " " "
Climate Data " "
Financial News " " "
Market Data " " " " "
Financial Reports " " " " " "
Financial curriculum and certifications " " " "
Table 2: Overview of multimodal financial data.
articles/websites or creating a customized database as in [ 70], an in-
vestment institution would consult the world’s ten greatest investors
(namely their digital avatars) in an elite brainstorming session at the
cost of $5000.
2 Data-Centric Approach for Multimodal
Financial Data
We first summarize the common multimodal financial data in Sec-
tion 2.1. Then, we describe typical types of multimodal financial
data in Sections 2.2 to Section 2.7.
2.1 Spectrum of Multimodal Financial Data
We emphasize the data-centric approach [49, 92], since data readi-
ness is a prerequisite of AI readiness . The principle in comput-
ing, “garbage in, garbage out" (also known as GIGO), states that
flawed, biased, or poor quality ("garbage") data or input produces
a result or output of similar ("garbage") quality. If feed a model
with inaccurate, incomplete, or irrelevant data, one can expect the
results it produces to be equally flawed. Therefore, one cannot rely
on such a model for decision-making processes in finance.
Multimodal data are common in business, finance, accounting,
and auditing, as illustrated in Fig. 1 (left block).
• Text data: Text is the most prevalent data type, including finan-
cial news, financial reports, transcripts of earnings conference
call, and social media posts. These textual data provide timely
market information and reflect the sentiments of market partici-
pants.
• Number: Numerical data, such as stock prices, financial indica-
tors, and economic statistics, offer market insights. Analysts and
investors frequently rely on numerical data for market forecast-
ing.
• Chart data: Charts are frequently included in financial reports,
news articles, and related materials. It visually represents market
trends and patterns, facilitating easier interpretation of market
behavior and dynamics.
• Tabular data: Structured financial data presented in tables, in-
cluding balance sheets, income statements, stock prices, and
trading volumes.
• Market data: It is a sequence of data points indexed in time
order. In the financial sector, time series data is commonly used
to represent how a financial indicator changes over time.
• Visual data: Visual data includes images and videos. They are
from financial media and official announcements. Visual data
provides detailed insights beyond textual and numerical data,
illustrating complex market events and trends.
• Audio data: Financial podcasts and recordings of earnings con-
ference calls contain critical auditory information. Audio modali-
ties can influence market perception and offer additional dimen-
sions for sentiment analysis and market prediction.
Multimodal financial data can refer to a combination of the above
uni-modal data. For instance, Earning Conference Calls (ECCs) con-
sist of two modalities: the audio of a presentation and its textual
transcripts. Multimodal financial data has several unique charac-
teristics, including data streaming, low signal-to-noise ratio (Low-
SNR), and semistructured formats [12]. We list the common types
in Table 2 and describe them in the following subsections.
2.2 Earning Conference Calls (ECCs)
The earnings conference call (ECC) is a teleconference or webcast
held quarterly by a public company. Stakeholders (including an-
alysts, investors, and the media) participate to obtain the latest
financial status of the company. First, the CEO/CFO highlights
the quarterly financial status, strategic initiatives, and forward-
looking plans. Then, analysts and investors ask questions during
the Q&A session. The release of ECCs is correlated with market


[Page 4]
ICAIF 24, Nov. 15, NY, USA Xiao-Yang Liu Yanglet, Yupeng Cao, and Li Deng
Figure 2: An ECC example of Tesla 2024 Q3 on Oct. 23, 2024.
The CEO, Elon Musk, presented a speech to explain the com-
pany’s revenue for the past quarter and major related events
and provided an overview plan. The close prices of the fol-
lowing two days were $260.48 and $269.19.
reactions, making them an important resource for analyzing market
changes [17].
An ECC example of Tesla 2024 Q3 is shown in Fig. 2. This call
has 72 minutes, including a 29 minute presentation by Tesla CEO
Elon Musk and 43 minute Q&A session. First, Elon Musk summa-
rized Tesla’s Q3 revenue and car production status and underscored
Tesla’s ongoing strategy to accelerate the global transition to sus-
tainable energy. In the end, Elon reiterated Tesla’s preparations
for introducing more affordable models. During the Q&A session,
Tesla’s executive team responded to questions about product re-
search and development, upcoming product plans, Tesla’s Full Self-
Driving offerings, etc. Owing to good revenue performance and
car production, Tesla’s stock price sustained an upward trend in
the following two days. The entire ECC is saved as an ".mp3/.wav"
audio file, and the corresponding transcript is also recorded. Both
audio and text data can be accessed and analyzed by the general
public.
The creation of an ECC dataset is critical for developing ana-
lytical tools, particularly for stock movement prediction and risk
modeling. MDRM [59] is a representative ECC dataset that includes
576 earnings conference calls from 280 companies in the S&P 500
for the year 2017. The entire dataset is 5.7 GB in storage. The author
segmented the transcripts into individual sentences and aligned
them with corresponding audio clips, resulting in a total of 88,829
paired sentences and audio clips. The audio data is available from
earningcast5 and transcript file can be downloaded fromSeeking
Alpha6. A series of research works extract critical information from
textual transcripts and integrate it with audio features such as tone
and sentiment in a speech to assess risks (e.g., volatility) [7, 59, 89].
The current approach to financial analysis based on ECC data
faces several key challenges related to dataset curation. First, the
existing ECC dataset is limited in size and lacks sufficient coverage
5https://earningscast.com/
6https://seekingalpha.com/
Figure 3: An MPC example held by the U.S. Federal Reserve
on May 1st, 2024. The Governor presented a press speech,
followed by a Q&A session. After the conference, the stock
index declined, while Treasury yields increased. Later, the
stock index exhibited a gradual recovery.
of companies across diverse industries, as ECC characteristics vary
considerably between companies. Second, aligning audio with the
text remains imperfect. Splitting the ECC data into segments fre-
quently fails to align precisely with sentence boundaries, potentially
leading to semantic incoherence in the segmented text and audio.
Therefore, it is essential to establish a dataset curation pipeline that
focuses on acquiring, organizing, segmenting, and labeling ECC
data. Such a data infrastructure will enable the creation of more
effective financial applications.
2.3 Monetary Policy Conferences (MPCs)
Monetary Policy Conferences (MPCs) are regularly held by a coun-
try’s central bank, like the U.S. Federal Reserve. An MPC deliberates
on a nation’s economic conditions, articulates monetary policy, and
assesses potential economic risks. The conference includes a press
presentation by the governor, followed by a Q&A session with
journalists. Given their provision of critical insights into a central
bank’s decisions, MPCs are instrumental in influencing economic
conditions, such as commodity trading, inflation, and currency
exchange rates.
Fig. 3 shows an example of the Federal Open Market Commit-
tee (FOMC) conference on May 1st, 2024. This conference has 48
minutes with 8 minutes presentation and 40 minutes Q&A session.
In the presentation, Federal Reserve Chairman Jerome Powell em-
phasized that inflation remains a major concern and suggested the
possibility of further policy tightening. Then, the FOMC unani-
mously decided to keep the benchmark short-term borrowing rate
at 5.25%–5.5%. This rate is the highest level in 23 years. After the
release of the conference recording, consumer surveys indicated
heightened economic anxiety7. Stock markets experienced declines
while Treasury yields increased. In the subsequent period, however,
the stock index gradually recovered.
7Reported by CNBC: https://www.cnbc.com/2024/05/22/fed-minutes-may-2024-.html


[Page 5]
Multimodal Financial Foundation Models (MFFMs):
Progress, Prospects, and Challenges ICAIF 24, Nov. 15, NY, USA
Financial Reports Frequency Publisher Focus Required by SEC
Form 10-Q Quarterly Company Interim financial statements and recent operational updates Yes
Form 10-K Annually Company Comprehensive, audited financial results and business overview Yes
DEF 14A Annually Company Governance, executive compensation, and voting matters Yes
Form 8-K Event-drivenCompany Disclosure of significant, material events affecting operations Yes
Earnings Release Quarterly Company Preliminary quarterly financial results and management commentaryNo
Annual Report Annually Company Simplified summary highlighting performance and management visionNo
Zacks Investment ReportsFrequently Third-party (Zacks) Stock ratings, earnings forecasts, and investment recommendations No
Sell-side Broker ReportsFrequently Third-party (Analysts)In-depth analysis, valuation, forecasts, and buy/sell recommendationsNo
Table 3: Financial reports with different frequency, source, primary focus and SEC requirements.
Analyzing MPC data can help illuminate policy decisions and
assist in forecasting economic trends. The first comprehensive MPC
dataset MONOPOLY [48] has 180 GB in size. It includes 340 MPC
instances from six countries’ central banks: the United States, the
United Kingdom, the European Union, Canada, New Zealand, and
South Africa. In total, the dataset comprises 15,729 minutes of
recorded content, where each MPC session has on average 53 min-
utes. Typically, every MPC includes approximately 10 minutes of
presentation, followed by a Q&A session with more than 40 min-
utes. Each MPC consists of three parts: Audio, Text, and Video. The
dataset was constructed by employing the BeautifulSoup Python
package8 to scrape MPC dates, ‘.mp3’ audio, ‘.MP4’ videos, and PDF
transcripts. Text data are subsequently extracted from PDF tran-
scripts by using Urllib9. Recent studies use this dataset to jointly
model audio, text, and video features to predict various economic
indicators [48, 52].
The following challenges are faced when using the MPC dataset
to build an analysis tool for economic conditions. First, storing MPC
data needs to maintain audio, text, and video modalities together. It
introduces the challenges related to efficient data management. Sec-
ond, processing MPC data requires precise alignment across audio,
text, and video modalities, which remains technically challenging.
Thus, establishing a data curation pipeline for MPC is essential for
advancing related methodological development.
2.4 Financial Reports
The financial report is a formal document that presents a company’s
financial activities, performance, management discussion, and au-
dited financial statements. The frequently-used financial reports
include filings (e.g., 10-K, 10-Q, DEF-14A, 8-K) required by the U.S.
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), company-issued docu-
ments for stakeholders (e.g., earnings releases and annual reports),
and third-party analysis reports such as Zacks reports and sell-side
broker reports. These reports differ in their publication frequency,
publisher, and areas of emphasis.
A summary of these financial reports is provided in Table 3. Mar-
ket participants can access various financial reports from different
companies based on their specific needs. These reports enable in-
vestors to evaluate a company’s status and identify broader market
trends. Additionally, these financial reports are monitored by gov-
ernment and regulatory agencies to ensure fairness in trading and
other financial activities. Recently, on the FinanceBench dataset
[23], GPT-4 model incorrectly answered or refused to answer 81%
of questions.
8https://www.crummy.com/software/BeautifulSoup/
9https://pypi.org/project/urllib3/
2.5 Financial News
Financial news refers to news that pertains to money and invest-
ments, including news on markets. It is disseminated through
various channels, including traditional financial reporting (e.g.,
The Wall Street Journal), financial news services platforms (e.g.,
Bloomberg terminal), social media (e.g., Twitter and LinkedIn), on-
line discussion forums (e.g., Reddit), and interactive media formats
such as live broadcasts. Financial news can take different formats,
including text, video, audio, numerical, charts, and tabular data.
It has become increasingly important in forecasting financial out-
comes, such as stock volatility, investor sentiment, market risks,
and macroeconomic stability [56, 63].
The GameStop (GME) short squeeze event in January 2021 ex-
emplifies how financial news can impact the financial markets.
In the beginning, hedge funds published short-selling reports on
GME, forecasting a decline in its stock price based on weak finan-
cial fundamentals. They also spread their view online, prompting
institutional investors to establish short positions on GME. How-
ever, someone discovered that financial institutions were exces-
sively short-selling GME and shared this finding on social plat-
forms such as Reddit’s r/WallStreetBets. It attracted extensive dis-
cussions, which resulted in collective buying activities. Individual
investors’ behavior drives GME stock prices upward. Then, Elon
Musk’s retweet ‘Gamestonk!!’, making such a short squeeze event
spread globally. Institutional investors subsequently faced pressure
to purchase shares to cover their short positions, thereby intensify-
ing the stock’s upward momentum. The price of GME stock reached
$530 from $1 within that two-month period, resulting in bankruptcy
for a hedge fund. This incident highlights the significant impact of
financial news on market trends.
During financial events such as those previously described, large
volumes of news data are generated rapidly. Efficiently managing
and processing this extensive news data is a challenging task. De-
veloping automated methods to extract useful information from
massive amounts of multimodal news will save financial market
practitioners a lot of time and effort. Lin et al. [34] employed LLMs
to analyze GME short squeeze event. LLMs were used to clean exten-
sive collections of online financial news, resulting in the creation of
a high-quality news dataset. The dataset was then used to analyze
user behavior and the underlying mechanisms driving information
dissemination. Their findings underscore the substantial potential
of LLMs in financial news analysis.
Effective collection of financial news data is crucial for analyzing
market dynamics. Financial news data can be collected from various
online platforms and sources. First, specialized financial platforms,
such as Bloomberg, Dow Jones, Yahoo Finance, and CNBC, deliver


[Page 6]
ICAIF 24, Nov. 15, NY, USA Xiao-Yang Liu Yanglet, Yupeng Cao, and Li Deng
timely and professional financial news. Second, professional news
organizations, such as Reuters, offer financial news coverage. Third,
social media, including X (formerly Twitter) and Reddit, also pro-
vide financial news. Users can access financial news data through
platform-specific APIs or manually gather financial news data di-
rectly from these platforms. However, users must be mindful of
copyright restrictions associated with each platform.
Although amounts of financial news data are available, there
remain several challenges to making these raw data into usable
datasets: 1) Trustworthiness. Financial news from various sources
may include subjective content or misinformation. Evaluating the
reliability of financial news is a significant challenge; 2) Volume
issue. A large amount of financial news is disseminated daily, mak-
ing it difficult to effectively process and manage; and 3) Modality
alignment. Financial news includes various types of information,
such as charts, tables, and images. A key challenge is accurately
aligning textual content with its corresponding other elements.
2.6 Market Data and Alternative Data
2.6.1 Market Data. Market data refers to price information and
other related data for financial instruments provided by trading
venues. It represents financial information through different modal-
ities. For example, market data uses time-series data to record a
company’s stock price, numerical data to represent financial indica-
tors, and charts or tabular data to display a company’s operational
performance. These multimodal market data provide investors with
diverse perspectives on current market changes and historical move-
ments, supporting informed decision-making [30].
Financial markets have undergone a rapid change due to the
increasing amount of data. Extracting actionable insights from
these vast and heterogeneous market data to support decision-
making in complex market environments has therefore become a
challenge [20]. Reinforcement learning (RL) provides a promising
approach to address this challenge. RL could train trading agents to
interact with dynamic market environments and to optimize their
financial decisions autonomously [20, 68]. The financial reinforce-
ment learning (FinRL) project [38–41] offers a user-friendly virtual
market environment that includes a wide range of multimodal mar-
ket data. FinRL integrates commonly used Deep Reinforcement
Learning (DRL) algorithms, enabling users to develop their own
DRL trading strategies. Recently, FinRL 2025 contest10 proposed the
FinRL-DeepSeek project, combining reinforcement learning with
LLMs to develop an automated stock trading agent trained on stock
price and financial news data. This hybrid approach enhances the
capacity to process complex, evolving market information [75].
Quantamental investment refers to combining computer-driven
and human-driven research to analyze the amount of market data
to construct a portfolio [69]. For example, alpha factor mining has
garnered attention for its ability to identify and exploit market inef-
ficiencies and for its seamless integration with AI-based forecasting
methods.
2.6.2 Climate Data for Commodity Trading. Climate data is the
records of climate conditions observed at specific locations and
10https://finrl-contest.readthedocs.io/en/latest/
Figure 4: An example question from CFA Level-1 exam. The
question is about currency exchange, where numerical data
and tabular data are given. Respondents are required to com-
prehend the provided information, interpret the table, per-
form calculations, and then select the correct answer.
times, collected using particular instruments and standardized pro-
cedures. Common types of climate data include precipitation, tem-
perature, wind speed, humidity, and satellite imagery of cloud
coverage. Climate changes can affect the supply of goods, po-
tentially causing significant price fluctuations and market uncer-
tainty [50, 66]. By analyzing weather data, investors can better
understand and anticipate its impact on financial markets.
2.7 Financial Curriculum and Certifications
Completion of a degree requires successfully navigating the learn-
ing path through the financial curriculum on campus. Afterward,
earning a professional certification will enable a candidate to em-
bark on her career path toward becoming a senior professional.
These degree-type and certification-type questions contain mul-
timodal financial data, including textual descriptions, numerical
calculations, graphs, charts, and data tables. Correctly answering
these questions requires a combination of financial knowledge and
reasoning capacity. Fig. 4 shows an example of the CFA exam 11.
Evaluating MFFMs’ performance on these questions can assess
whether these models truly understand financial knowledge and
master the reasoning capability [53]. Recent studies have shown
that ChatGPT and GPT-4 models struggle with CFA exam questions
[6, 47]. QFinBen [53] and tutor agent12 organized university-level
and professional certification problems to measure model profi-
ciency. Moreover, such organized questions allow interpretation
of the model’s score. In other words, one can easily understand a
model’s strength and also identify where the model is struggling.
11https://www.cfainstitute.org/programs/cfa-program/cfa-program-level-i-sample-
questions
12https://finllm-leaderboard.readthedocs.io/en/latest/demos_of_finagents/tutor_
agent.html


[Page 7]
Multimodal Financial Foundation Models (MFFMs):
Progress, Prospects, and Challenges ICAIF 24, Nov. 15, NY, USA
3 Multimodal Financial Applications:
Agentic FinAI Ecosystem
In this section, we describe FinAgents in real-life scenarios, which
are categorized into two types, tool agents and financial service
agents, respectively. We point out key enablers for an upcoming
era of agentic FinAI ecosystem.
3.1 FinAgents Powered by FinGPT
Our SecureFinAI Lab at Columbia has developed several prototypes
of FinAgents, powered by FinGPT [37, 42, 70, 88, 93]: search agent
[70], tutor agent [53], XBRL agent [21], and FinRL trading agents
[38–41]. The search agent can retrieve real-time financial data from
the Internet and generate personalized advice. The tutor agent de-
mocratizes financial knowledge and interprets complex regulations.
The XBRL agent [21] analyzes SEC filings (following the eXtensible
Business Reporting Language (XBRL)) by calling an external re-
triever and a calculator. The FinRL trading agent [38–41] provides
an end-to-end framework that integrates commonly used Deep
Reinforcement Learning (DRL) algorithms (such as DQN, DDPG,
PPO, SAC, A2C, and TD). It enables company clients to develop
their trading strategies.
AI agents will enable learning systems to take action by observ-
ing the complex environment through iterative improvement [16].
This capability could assist in addressing more complex real-world
financial tasks. OpenAI13 and Google [81] recently released detailed
guides for agent development, which provide a good starting point
for developing FinAgents.
Fig. 5 provides a generic framework of FinAgents, powered by
FinGPT and agent protocols. It enables the development of multiple
FinAgents tailored to various financial scenarios. We categorize
the nine financial agents into two groups: tool agents and financial
service agents.
3.1.1 Tool Agents.
• Search agent: Facing massive multimodal financial data, the
MFFM-enhanced FinGPT search agent retrieves and generates
personalized results tailored to the diverse backgrounds and
requirements of compound users. These agents would facilitate
data-driven decision-making by providing precise, context-aware
insights. More importantly, compared to professional financial
database platforms such as the Bloomberg Terminal14, the cost of
using commercial multimodal large language models (MM-LLMs)
(e.g., GPT-4o) or deploying open-source MM-LLMs is lower. Users
can easily construct their own customized financial AI search
agents, achieving search results that rival those of professional
agencies. The effectiveness of such an approach has already been
demonstrated by FinGPT search agent [70, 94].
• Tutor agent: There are two recent Guinness World Records [19]:
within a window of 24 hours, 46, 045 attendance in an introduc-
tion to AI course and 112, 718 for a mathematics course, respec-
tively. These numbers show a huge demand for online education.
MFFMs can provide a scalable solution to meet this demand glob-
ally. For online education platforms, AI tutors equipped with
13https://cdn.openai.com/business-guides-and-resources/a-practical-guide-to-
building-agents.pdf
14https://www.bloomberg.com/professional/products/bloomberg-terminal/
the reasoning capabilities of MFFMs can provide high-quality
tutoring services. For students, MFFMs can deliver a person-
alized learning experience. QFinben [ 53] demonstrates that a
pre-trained MFFM model with strong capabilities in undergradu-
ate, graduate, and certification exams would provide a scalable,
personalized solution for AI tutors in business and finance.
• Robo-advisor: Robo-advisors offer automated, algorithm-driven
financial planning and investment management with minimal
human intervention. They deliver personalized investment ad-
vice and portfolio management to individuals at a lower cost
than traditional financial advisors. MFFMs can further enhance
Robo-advisors by improving personalized interactions, integrat-
ing multimodal data for a comprehensive view of market and
portfolio impacts, and providing ongoing adjustments and re-
minders through continuous user engagement.
• Coding agent : Coding agents empower investors to rapidly
build personal financial analytical tools [78].
3.1.2 Financial Service Agents. The financial services industry re-
lies on digitized financial information for critical business decisions,
such as business operations, investment, and mergers and acquisi-
tions. Digitized financial information includes text, audio, images,
and diverse market information. MFFM-powered workflow can
integrate diverse multimodal financial data and offer customized
financial services tailored to specific needs.
• Credit scoring agent: Leveraging LLMs, investors could build a
credit scoring agent to generate transparent, data-driven credit
scores.
• Auditing agent: In auditing, auditors need to review lots of doc-
uments, manage multiple subtasks, and ultimately complete the
auditing process. AI agents can autonomously perform complex
audit procedures involving tasks such as AI-driven risk assess-
ment or financial statement reviews [62]. By assisting auditors in
completing these tasks, AI agents can improve auditing efficiency
and reduce human error.
• Compliance agent: Integrating MFFMs into AI compliance of-
fers organizations a scalable approach to managing regulatory
and ethical requirements. Such an integration streamlines com-
pliance workflows, automates complex regulatory analyses, and
reinforces ethical AI practices—essential steps for building trust,
mitigating risks, and fostering responsible AI developments [73].
• Report generation agent: Report generation refers to the use
of MFFM-powered AI agents to consolidate complex financial
data into concise, readable textual content. Regular, accurate,
and insightful reports help stakeholders understand performance
trends, identify risks, and make informed decisions. MFFM-powered
report generation agents enable users to quickly generate high-
quality, data-driven, and personalized financial reports.
• Trading agent: Trading is a complex financial decision-making
task influenced by a wide array of market data. MFFM-powered
agents can integrate different multimodal market information
and output appropriate trading strategies. More importantly, it
enables market stakeholders to employ agent systems to get per-
sonalized investment suggestions at a low cost. The Financial
reinforcement learning (FinRL) trading agent [ 38–41] offers a
user-friendly virtual market environment that includes a wide
range of multimodal market data. FinRL integrates commonly


[Page 8]
ICAIF 24, Nov. 15, NY, USA Xiao-Yang Liu Yanglet, Yupeng Cao, and Li Deng
Figure 5: The FinAgent framework powered by FinGPT and agent protocols (e.g, Model Context Protocol).
used Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) algorithms such as
DQN, DDPG, PPO, SAC, A2C, and TD, enabling users to de-
velop their own DRL trading strategies. Recently, FinRL 2025
contest15 proposed the FinRL-DeepSeek project, combining re-
inforcement learning with LLMs to develop an automated stock
trading agent trained on stock price and financial news data.
This hybrid approach enhances the capacity to process complex,
evolving market information [75].
There are two LLM-based trading agent demos: 1) FinMem [90]
is a single-agent system combined with a memory database to
retain valid market information and adjust trading strategies in
a timely manner. 2) FinCon [91] is a multi-agent framework that
can handle multimodal market data, including text, time series,
and audio. By employing a manager-analyst hierarchy, FinCon
enables coordinated, natural language interactions and enhances
decision-making with a unique self-critiquing mechanism for
systematic investment belief updates.
By summarizing the application scenarios outlined above, it
becomes clear that the MFFM-powered agent has great potential to
offer market stakeholders scalable, personalized, and cost-effective
solutions to multiple complex real-world financial tasks.
3.2 Enablers for a Coming Era of Agentic AI
Ecosystem
3.2.1 Open Models. Open models encourage people’s choice and
utilization in building agentic AI systems. The openness of a model
can be assessed from three dimensions: code, data, and documen-
tation. Many models only open-source a portion of them, and the
behavior of misusing the “open source” label is called openwash-
ing [22, 33, 80]. Openwashing poses a challenge as it introduces
confusion into the agentic AI ecosystem.
15https://finrl-contest.readthedocs.io/en/latest/
Model Openness Framework [79]16 and OpenMDW License 17
provide the framework to develop an open-source agreement, build
an open-source standard, and evaluate the openness of models using
a leaderboard [79]. This approach would enhance transparency in
model usage while preserving the integrity of the entire agentic AI
ecosystem.
3.2.2 Agent Protocols. Agent protocols specify message structures,
negotiation mechanisms, and coordination procedures to facilitate
efficient collaboration among agents. Currently, there are two com-
monly used protocols:
• Model Context Protocol (MCP) 18: MCP is an open standard
that enables developers to build secure, two-way connections
between data sources and AI-powered tools.
• Agent to Agent (A2A)19: The A2A protocol will allow AI agents
to communicate with each other, securely exchange information,
and coordinate actions on top of various enterprise platforms or
applications.
3.3 Case Study of FinGPT-Powered Agents
3.3.1 FinGPT Search Agents. FinGPT search agent [70] can quickly
retrieve multimodal financial data customized to the specific needs
of individual users or institutional investors and generate personal-
ized content. Fig. 5 provides a generic framework of the FinGPT-
powered agents. Interaction begins through a user interface where
users input inquiries. Then, the agent will call different MCP clients
accordingly to communicate via standard input/output with the
corresponding MCP servers.
These MCP servers handle different functions such as: 1) access-
ing local financial files; 2) searching financial news from remote
services like Yahoo Finance through Web APIs; 3) querying market
data from databases; 4) analyzing the market sentiment from social
16https://isitopen.ai/
17https://openmdw.ai/
18https://www.anthropic.com/news/model-context-protocol
19https://developers.googleblog.com/en/a2a-a-new-era-of-agent-interoperability/


[Page 9]
Multimodal Financial Foundation Models (MFFMs):
Progress, Prospects, and Challenges ICAIF 24, Nov. 15, NY, USA
Characteristic BloombergGPT [82] FinGPT [37, 42, 88, 93]
Backbone Model Bloom Llama
Model Parameters 50 Billion 8 Billion
Corpus Size (Tokens) 708 billion (363B financial, 345B general) Real-time fetching from 34 sources
Compute Resources 512 NVIDIA A100 GPUs Single NVIDIA RTX 3090 GPU
Total GPU-hours ∼650,000 hours ∼ 4-6 hours
Estimated Cost $2.76 million Minimal (<$100)
Update Frequency One time Frequent fine-tuning
Table 4: Comparison of BloombergGPT and FinGPT in terms of training data and computation costs.
platforms like Twitter and Reddit/WallStreetBets. The framework
emphasizes user-controlled permissions, explicitly asking for autho-
rization before accessing external data sources, thus maintaining
transparency and user privacy. MCP includes local and remote in-
teractions, with remote servers interacting through the networking
protocol (HTTP with SSE), ensuring real-time data updates.
3.3.2 Buffett Agent. It is a fine-tuned FinGPT model that acts as a
financial advisor in the style of Warren Buffett. Using the FinLoRA
framework [72], such a FinGPT model was adapted by feeding in
the Llama-3.1-8B base model with a custom ‘Buffett Brain’ dataset
of over 25,000 question–answer pairs. We curated this extensive
dataset from diverse sources related to Buffett and Berkshire Hath-
away, including Buffett’s Wikipedia pages and notable books about
his life and investment philosophy. It also incorporates Berkshire
Hathaway’s annual shareholder letters (to capture Buffett’s tone
and advice), transcripts of the shareholder meetings, and even Berk-
shire’s SEC filings, ensuring the agent has both Buffett’s folksy tone
and factual financial knowledge for technical questions.
The actual compute cost of the fine-tuning process was under $20,
indicating a highly accessible way to build a personalized Buffett
agent. In the evaluations, the Buffett Agent’s responses aligned
much more closely with Buffett’s style and verbiage than those
of the base model, achieving roughly an 8.8% higher BERTScore.
The agent effectively produces plain-spoken, conversational advice
reminiscent of Buffett’s own folksy wisdom. We provide a live
demonstration of Buffett Agent at 20.
To further enhance the agent’s capabilities, Buffett Agent can
integrate with FinGPT’s multi-source search architecture. By using
FinGPT Search Agent MCP server, Buffett Agent is able to retrieve
up-to-date Berkshire Hathaway letters, news headlines, and filings
on demand. With such an upgrade, the Buffett Agent could maintain
Buffett’s authentic voice while supplementing its answers with
current information and deeper domain vocabulary.
4 Landscape of MFFMs: Progress and Prospect
Recent progress in foundation models with enhanced multimodal
capabilities has attracted research efforts to explore their finan-
cial counterparts. First, through a case study, we present our own
first-hand experiences of training a MFFM model and illustrate a ref-
erence lifecycle. Then, we summarize the latest development in the
general-purpose domain. Subsequently, we describe the progress
of MFFMs from three aspects: benchmark, model, and dataset. At
the end, we highlight the prospects for MFFMs.
20https://finlora-docs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/tutorials/buffett_agent.html
4.1 First-hand Experiences of Model Training
through Case Studies
We first review the training experiences of two representative
language-centric financial foundation models: BloombergGPT [82]
and FinGPT [37, 42, 88, 93]. Then, we summarize our experiences
of training Open-FinLLMs [85] and present a reference lifecycle of
MFFM development.
4.1.1 Case Study of Language-centric Financial Foundation Model.
A high-quality financial corpus and a powerful base model are two
key ingredients for the successful pretraining of a domain-specific
foundation model. As a representative FinLLM, BloombergGPT
[82] exemplifies large-scale pretraining in finance: it is a 50-billion-
parameter model trained on a mixed dataset with 708 billion tokens
of text (about 363B tokens from the financial domain and 345B
tokens from the general domain). This mixed dataset allows the
model to retain broad general knowledge while acquiring deep
financial expertise. BloombergGPT outperforms general-purpose
LLMs on financial tasks without sacrificing performance on general
tasks.
Pretraining requires prohibitive computational resources and
training data. In contrast, FinGPT [37] took a data-centric approach
with LoRA fine-tuning. It aggregates real-time financial text from 34
diverse Internet sources and uses parameter-efficient tuning meth-
ods (e.g., LoRA, QLoRA) to adapt a general LLM to financial tasks.
By leveraging continuously updated data and even incorporating
market feedback through a reinforcement learning strategy based
on stock price movements, FinGPT can continually refine a model’s
financial knowledge at relatively low computational cost. This ap-
proach adds flexibility and keeps the model’s expertise up-to-date,
complementing the one-time fine-tuning of specific datasets.
FinGPT vs. BloombergGPT: Data and Cost Comparison .
Table 4 provides a comparison between BloombergGPT and FinGPT.
BloombergGPT utilized a massive corpus exceeding 700 billion
tokens and required approximately 650,000 GPU-hours, resulting in
an estimated cost of $2.7 million. In contrast, FinGPT employs a fine-
tuning approach on updated financial datasets, reducing both the
data requirements and computational expense. For the sentiment
analysis task on the Financial Phrase Bank dataset, FinGPT’s F1-
score of 0.878 beats BloombergGPT’s 0.511. FinGPT offers a cost-
efficient solution and enables frequent updates of the model for
diverse financial applications.
4.1.2 Case Study of Training a MFFM Model. The development of
MFFMs may consist of three stages: pretraining, fine-tuning, and
alignment, where a reference lifecycle is shown in Fig. 6. Based on


[Page 10]
ICAIF 24, Nov. 15, NY, USA Xiao-Yang Liu Yanglet, Yupeng Cao, and Li Deng
News
Filings 
Press
Web
Proprietary 
Financial Corpus
Fine-tuning 
Dataset
(a) Pretraining (b) Fine-Tuning (c) Alignment
Fine-tuned
MFFM
Alignment
Dataset
Text
Multimodal
Text
Multimodal
<Text>
<Chart Image>
<Caption>
Instruction: <Instruction: Please answer the following question>
Input: <Text>
Response: <Text>
Instruction: <Instruction: Given the image, answer the following 
question>
Input: {<Chart Image>, <Quesion>}
Response: <Text>
(d) Pretraining Data (e) Fine-Tuning Data
Pre-trained
MFFM
PretrainingGeneral Corpus
 Instruction Tuning
Supervised Fine-Tuning
(e) Alignment Data
Prompting
IR task
TA task
Q&A task
…
Human Preference
Safety Alignment
…
Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback 
Text
Instruction: <Instruction: Please answer the following question>
Input: <Text>
Response A:<Text>; Response B: <Text>
Human Evaluation for Two Responses: <Text>
Multimodal
Instruction: <Instruction: Given the image, answer the following 
question>
Input: {<Chart Image>, <Quesion>}
Response A: <Text>
Response B: <Text>
Human Evaluation for Two Responses: Response A is more 
thorough, organized and helpful.
Figure 6: The reference lifecycle of model development. It consists of three key stages: (a) Pretraining, where a combination of
general and financial corpora is used to pre-train the MFFM, ensuring that it comprehensively understands world financial
knowledge; (b) Fine-Tuning, where the pre-trained MFFM fine-tuning on instruction or specific task dataset to enhance its
understanding of user intentions or specific tasks; (c) Alignment Tuning, allowing the MFFM to generate content that is more
human preference and secure. To make it easier to understand, we have provided examples of data from each stage in (d)–(e).
our experiences with the project Open-FinLLMs [85], we elaborate
on each stage accordingly.
(Continual) Pre-training stage: Open-FinLLMs [85] employ
an 18 billion-token corpus from the general domain and a 52 billion-
token corpus from the financial domain. This curated dataset al-
lows the model to keep the general knowledge while getting the
financial knowledge. Then, Open-FinLLMs chose Llama3-8B as the
base model for the continual pre-training and obtained a financial
model called FinLLaMA. The continual pre-training process runs
on 64 A100 80GB GPUs, approximately 250 GPU hours per epoch.
FinLLaMA set the maximum sequence length to 8, 192 tokens. Fin-
LLaMA surpasses its base model LLaMA3-8B on several financial
tasks, highlighting the effectiveness of (continual) pretraining.
Fine-tuning stage: This step aims to enable the model’s multi-
modal capabilities, enhance the model’s instruction-following capa-
bilities, and optimize performance on downstream financial tasks.
Building upon FinLLaMA, its multimodal extension, FinLLaVA ad-
dresses multimodal financial tasks by employing multimodal in-
struction tuning. The instruction-tuning dataset comprises 1.43
million image-text pairs. Instruction tuning is conducted on eight
NVIDIA HGX H20 80GB GPUs, with the entire process requiring
approximately 30 hours for one epoch. FinLLaVA outperforms all
open-source MM-LLMs chart understanding tasks and is second
only to the closed-source GPT-family MM-LLMs.
Alignment stage: This step aims to guide fine-tuned MFFMs to
generate human-preferred and safety output. FinTral [2] includes an
alignment tuning process. First, an alignment dataset is constructed.
FinTral fed the instruction dataset into both a high-capacity LLM,
such as GPT-4, and a less capable casual LLM. The output from the
high-capacity LLM is labeled as positive samples, while those from
the casual LLM are labeled as negative samples. Then, alignment
tuning is conducted using the Direct Preference Optimization (DPO)
method [60]. After alignment tuning, FinTral not only generates
the output that is aligned with human preferences but also greatly
reduces the hallucinatory content.
4.2 Progress of MFFMs
Taking a model consumer perspective, we review the progress of
MFFMs from three aspects: evaluation and benchmarking suite,
model development, and multimodal financial datasets.
A generic workflow would be as follows. A model consumer
starts by selecting a set of benchmark questions that captures the
expected model capabilities. Then, she may evaluate a set of candi-
date models (closed models via APIs and open models via publicly


[Page 11]
Multimodal Financial Foundation Models (MFFMs):
Progress, Prospects, and Challenges ICAIF 24, Nov. 15, NY, USA
Text Tasks Multimodal Tasks Features
Benchmark #Tasks IE TA QA RM FO DM CQA VQA CU NU IU I2T ASR RAG Agent Language
FinBen [83] 24 6 8 3 4 1 1 - - - - - - - - " EN
MultiFinBen [54] 28 7 8 8 1 1 1 - - - - - - 3 - " EN/ZH/ES/GR/Jpn
QFinBen [53] 1 - - - - - - 1 - - - - - - " - EN
OmniEval [74] 5 5 - - - - - - - - - - - - " - EN
InverstorBench [31] 3 - - - - - 3 - - - - - - - - " EN
FFAMA [87] 1 - - - - - - - 1 - - - - - " - EN/ZH/FN
MME-Finance [18] 10 - - - - - - - 1 - 3 3 3 - - - EN
FinSet-Benchmark [2] 9 1 2 1 1 1 - - 1 1 1 - - - - - EN
FinAudio [8] 3 - - - - - - - - - - - - 3 - - EN
FinLLM Leaderboard[35] 24 6 8 3 4 1 1 - - - - - - - " " EN
Table 5: Comparison of financial benchmarks. Text tasks: Information Extraction (IE), Text Analysis (TA), Question Answer (QA),
Risk Management (RM), Forecasting (FO), Decision-Making (DM), Complex Question Answer (CQA). Multimodal tasks: Visual
Question Answer (VQA), Chart Understanding (CU), Numeral Understanding (NU), Image Understanding (IU), Image-to-Text
(I2T), Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR).
accessible weights) on such benchmark questions and pick the best-
performing model. Lastly, she may curate the multimodal financial
dataset to fine-tune the selected model.
4.2.1 Evaluation and Benchmarking Suite. Measuring a model’s
performance on various financial tasks is crucial for understand-
ing its quantitative capabilities. Benchmarks are used for model
comparisons, evaluations are used to understand the performance
properties of the system, and tests are used to validate that those
properties fall within acceptable bounds.
Benchmarking Question Sets. Currently, multiple financial
benchmarks provide comparisons from different perspectives.
• FinBen [83]21: It includes 46 datasets spanning 24 financial tasks
and covers seven critical tasks: information extraction (IE), tex-
tual analysis, question answering (QA), text generation (TG), risk
management (RM), forecasting (FO), and decision-making (DM).
FinBen evaluated 30 representative LLMs and identified several
key findings: LLM performed well in IE, and text analysis, but its
performance in complex tasks such as high-level reasoning and
text generation and prediction still needs to be improved.
• MultiFinBen [54]: Extending FinBen, MultiFinBen is the first
multilingual and multimodal benchmark over the global finan-
cial domain. It evaluates LLMs across multiple modalities (text,
vision, and audio) and various linguistic settings (monolingual,
bilingual, and multilingual) on domain-specific tasks. Extensive
evaluations of 22 SOTA models show that despite their strong
general capabilities, these models perform poorly on complex
cross-lingual and multimodal financial tasks.
• High-quality financial benchmark (QFinBen) [53]: QFinBen
explores the reasoning capabilities of LLM in complex finan-
cial questions. QFinBen assembled a dataset of 8,050 questions
sourced from undergraduate and graduate finance, accounting,
and economics examinations alongside professional financial ex-
ams such as the CFA, CPA, and FRM. QFinBen tests the dataset
by using the GPT-4o, Llamma 3.1-405B, and Mistral Large 2. The
findings indicate that LLMs still struggle to pass these complex
21The name “FinBen" also implies the big bang moment of powerful FinLLMs and
FinAgents.
examinations, highlighting their current limitations in addressing
sophisticated financial reasoning challenges.
• OmniEval [74]: It is the first RAG benchmark in the financial
domain. OmniEval evaluates the RAG framework from a multi-
dimensional that includes 1) a matrix-based RAG evaluation sys-
tem that classifies queries into five tasks and 16 financial topics,
thereby structuring the evaluation of different query scenarios; 2)
A multi-stage evaluation system that evaluates search and gener-
ation performance to evaluate the RAG process comprehensively;
and 3) Robust evaluation metrics derived from rule-based and
LLM-based evaluation metrics. The results of OmniEval high-
light that the RAG can effectively integrate external knowledge
to improve the accuracy of the generated results in a variety of
tasks. However, the evaluations also reveal that the RAG sys-
tem struggles with complex multi-hop reasoning and numerical
understanding.
• InverstorBench [31]: It’s the first LLM-based financial agent
benchmark. InverstorBench provides a comprehensive perfor-
mance evaluation of 13 different LLMs across varied market
scenarios, including stock trading, cryptocurrency trading, and
ETH trading. This benchmark shows that proprietary models
(e.g. GPT-4) generally exhibit better financial decision-making
capabilities under complex market conditions. However, Inver-
storBench also indicates that the performance of different LLMs
varies in stock, cryptocurrency, and ETF trading. This variabil-
ity not only underscores the inherent complexity of financial
markets but also emphasizes the critical importance of model
selection and fine-tuning on specific financial corpus.
• FFAMA [87]: It’s an open-source benchmark for financial multi-
lingual multimodal question answering (QA). It includes 1,758
meticulously collected question-answer pairs from university
textbooks and exams, spanning 8 major subfields in finance,
including corporate finance, asset management, and financial
engineering. FFAMA assesses a variety of SOTA MM-LLMs, re-
vealing that FAMMA presents a considerable challenge for these
MM-LLMs. Even advanced models such as GPT-4o and Claude35-
Sonnet attain only a 42% accuracy.
• MME-Finance [18]: MME-Finance is a bilingual financial visual
question and answer (VQA) benchmark. MME-Finance conducted


[Page 12]
ICAIF 24, Nov. 15, NY, USA Xiao-Yang Liu Yanglet, Yupeng Cao, and Li Deng
extensive experimental evaluations on 19 MM-LLMs to test their
perception, reasoning, and cognitive abilities on financial multi-
modal data. The results show that MM-LLMs that perform well in
general benchmark tests may perform poorly on MME-Finance.
Specifically, these models show poor performance in understand-
ing candle charts and technical indicator charts.
• FinSet-Benchmark [2]: It’s part of FinTral [2], containing 13
LLMs on seven text-based financial tasks, and 9 MM-LLMs on
Chart Understanding. FinSet-Benchamrk indicates that the post-
trained model using reinforcement learning with AI feedback
(RLAIF), like FinTral-DPO, ChatGPT, and GPT-4, shows signifi-
cant enhancements in comprehending complex texts, identifying
specific entities, and interpreting numerical data.
• FinAudio [8]: FinAudio is the first benchmark designed to eval-
uate the capacity of AudioLLMs [71] in the financial domain. It
first defines three tasks based on the unique characteristics of
the financial domain: 1) ASR for short financial audio, 2) ASR
for long financial audio, and 3) summarization of long financial
audio. Then, the authors curate two short and two long audio
datasets, respectively, and develop a novel dataset for financial
audio summarization. Then, FinAudio evaluates seven prevalent
AudioLLMs. Our evaluation reveals the limitations of existing
AudioLLMs in the financial domain and offers insights for im-
proving AudioLLMs.
These benchmarks provide an overview of the current landscape
of applying LLM to financial tasks. We can find that: 1) LLMs/MM-
LLMs can effectively improve the capabilities of information extrac-
tion relevant tasks and basic financial text analysis. Such improve-
ments can help users build automated financial data processing
systems, thus saving manual efforts and reducing human errors; and
2) Current LLMs/MM-LLMs still have limitations in their capacity
to answer complex financial questions, comprehend numerical val-
ues, and interpret charts and tables. This underscores the urgency
of developing MFFMs tailored for financial multimodal data.
Open FinLLM leaderboard [35] 22: FinLLMs and FinAgents with
multimodal capabilities are rapidly advancing, poised to revolution-
ize a wide range of applications across business, finance, accounting,
auditing, etc. Therefore, the timely evaluation of newly developed
FinLLMs and FinAgents is critical. Benchmarks are static and lack
the momentum to continuously adapt to and evaluate emerging
FinLLMs and FinAgents, thereby limiting their utility for real-world
applications and innovations. Therefore, establishing a standard-
ized, continuously maintained leaderboard is essential for the on-
going development and improvement of Multimodal FinLLMs and
FinAgents. Building on PIXIU [84], FinBen [83] and MultiFinBen
[54], the Open FinLLM leaderboard aims to maintain a dynamically
open platform that encourages innovative adoption and improved
models. Open FinLLM Leaderboard provides an interface between
academia, the open-source community, the financial industry, and
other stakeholders. Open FinLLM Leaderboard creates a collabora-
tive and open ecosystem by continuously updating new datasets,
tasks, and model performance.
Table 6 summarizes the sizes of question sets currently available
on the Open FinLLM leaderboard, categorized by financial tasks.
22https://github.com/finos-labs/Open-Financial-LLMs-Leaderboard/
Figure 7: Testing pipeline used in the FinLLM leaderboard
[35].
Figure 8: From user experiences to FinAI readiness: The iter-
ative process of evaluating FinLLMs on the leaderboard [ 35].
The Leaderboard is designed not only to be compatible with exist-
ing benchmarks but also to dynamically incorporate new question
sets. As shown in Table 6, the Open FinLLM Leaderboard has re-
cently introduced several new datasets comprising 150,800 novel
questions. These additions include expert-level seniors such as SEC
filing analysis, XBRL reporting, financial regulation comprehension,
and certification-related queries. These additional questions reflect
the practical requirements and specific contexts of the financial
industry.
Such a broad coverage allows industry professionals to identify
models suitable for specific applications, such as SEC filing analysis
for market predictions or financial regulations for credit scoring
and fraud detection. Fig. 7 is an overview of the testing pipeline.
It employs a zero-shot evaluation setting to test expert-validated
datasets, assessing models in multimodal settings across various
financial tasks. Models are compared fairly based on their ability
to handle unseen tasks in finance.
The Open FinLLM Leaderboard also aims to foster an open com-
munity that drives financial AI toward real-world applications and
establishes a gateway between academia and industry. By translat-
ing complex research achievements into accessible and actionable
insights, it aims to foster the growth of the Agentic AI Ecosystem.
The Open FinLLM Leaderboard is similar to established industry
standards such as MCP and MOF. It sets the benchmark for financial
AI readiness, ensuring that innovations in financial language mod-
els are both practical and impactful. The authors also discuss critical
aspects and how this leaderboard and the surrounding community
will contribute to FinLLMs’ readiness.
4.2.2 MFFM Models . Typically, MFFMs are built from open-
source LLMs, which serve as the backbone. These MFFMs are pre-
trained and fine-tuned using the specialized financial dataset. We
aim to provide readers with a comprehensive understanding of
the advancements in Multimodal Foundation Financial Models. We
highlight representative MFFMs in below:
• Open-FinLLMs [ 85]: We have introduced Open-FinLLMs in
Subsection 4.1. Open-FinLLMs consist of two Financial LLMs:


[Page 13]
Multimodal Financial Foundation Models (MFFMs):
Progress, Prospects, and Challenges ICAIF 24, Nov. 15, NY, USA
Task Category Evaluation and Benchmarking Suite #Questions
FinBen [83] MultiFinBen [54] Open FinLLM Leaderboard [35]
from classicial datasets
Information Extraction 4.6k 14k from FinBen and MultiFinBen 18.6k
Text Analysis 17k 10k from FinBen and MultiFinBen 27k
Text Generation 3k from FinBen from FinBen 3k
Question Answer 4.5k 7.1k from FinBen and MultiFinBen 11.6k
Forecasting 4.8k 1.7k from FinBen and MultiFinBen 6.5k
Risk Management 77k from FinBen from FinBen 77k
Decision-Making 3.4k 1k from FinBen and MultiFinBen 4.4k
Newly created datasets
SEC filing analysis - - 35.9k 35.9k
XBRL reporting - - 24.2k 24.2k
Financial regulations - - 5.1k 5.1k
Certification questions - - 85.6k 85.6k
Total 114.3k 33.8k 150.8k 300k
Table 6: Questions by category with additional benchmarks.
FinLLaMA and FinLLaVA. The experiment results demonstrate
that FinLLaMA gets superior performance over LLaMA3-8B,
LLaMA3.1-8B, and BloombergGPT in text classification, credit
scoring, fraud detection, Q&A, Sentiment Analysis, NER, and
decision-making tasks. FinLLaVA outperforms GPT4 and other
Financial LLMs in understanding tables and charts. The results
from Open-FinLLMs highlight the effectiveness of training finan-
cial domain-specific LLMs/MM-LLMs.
• FinTral [2]: It is a suite of state-of-the-art MFFMs built upon
the Mistral-7B model and tailored for pure text and multimodal
financial analysis. FinTral is pre-trained on 20 billion tokens
of domain-specific data in the first step, followed by instruc-
tion fine-tuning and alignment with AI feedback. Subsequently,
FinTral gets further instruction fine-tuning on multimodal in-
struction data. FinTral demonstrates good zero-shot capabilities,
outperforming GPT-4 in five of eight text-based tasks. Moreover,
FinTral’s multimodal performance surpasses that of all other
open-source MM-LLMs, ranking just behind GPT-4V.
• FinVis-GPT [76]: It’s a new MFFM specialized in financial chart
analysis. FinVis-GPT is pre-trained on a finance-oriented align-
ment/instructing following dataset, which includes various types
of financial charts and their corresponding descriptions. The ex-
periment results show that FinVis-GPT can interpret financial
charts and provide valuable analysis.
These studies have demonstrated that MFFMs already take im-
portant roles in multiple financial tasks. These works lay the founda-
tion for more sophisticated applications of AI in finance, potentially
transforming the landscape of financial analysis. Although the per-
formance of these MFFMs in some complex financial tasks still
needs to be improved, these findings also highlight the significant
potential for future development of MFFMs. Future work will focus
on further expanding the applicability of MFFMs in more complex
tasks and diverse financial scenarios.
4.2.3 Multimodal Financial Datasets. Different stages rely on
different types of training data. A high-quality training dataset will
affect the capacity of the trained MFFMs. This part will discuss each
stage’s dataset construction and characteristics.
• Pre-training dataset. As the first stage, pre-training data aims
to provide multimodal financial knowledge for models and en-
able the model to align the different modalities. During this stage,
different models curate their unique training corpora. A rep-
resentative training dataset is BloombergGPT’s FinPile [82]. It
comprises a total of 345 billion tokens from public data and 363
billion tokens from proprietary data.
• Instruction-tuning dataset. This stage aims to teach models to
better understand the instructions from the demanded tasks to
boost zero-shot capacity. OpenFinLLaV Afirst assembled a com-
prehensive multimodal dataset, subsequently utilizing GPT-4o to
extract financial content selectively. Ultimately, OpenFinLLaVA
created an extensive collection of 662k multimodal pre-trained
datasets, comprising images, charts, and tables. FinVis-GPT uti-
lized historical daily data from Chinese A-share stocks to create
visualizations, distributing the output into 80% candlestick and
20% line charts. FinTral utilizes several datasets to build a visual
pretraining dataset. Additionally, the Llava Instruct dataset is em-
ployed to enhance instruction understanding in the multimodal
LLMs, resulting in the creation of the instruction tuning dataset,
FinVis-IT.
4.3 Prospects of MFFMs
4.3.1 Reasoning Models. For financial reasoning tasks, founda-
tion models must effectively understand domain-specific terminolo-
gies, analyze structured data (e.g., financial tables and charts), per-
form mathematical calculations, and extract insights from lengthy
and complex documents [86]. CFA questions also require strong
reasoning capabilities [51]. Those tasks place higher demands on
the reasoning capabilities of foundation models.


[Page 14]
ICAIF 24, Nov. 15, NY, USA Xiao-Yang Liu Yanglet, Yupeng Cao, and Li Deng
Reinforcement learning algorithms have demonstrated substan-
tial potential in enhancing the reasoning capabilities of founda-
tion models, bringing them closer to human-level reasoning skills
[64]. Fin-R1 distills a financial reasoning dataset (Fin-R1-Data)
that includes 60,091 complete chain-of-thought (CoT) reasoning
paths from several financial datasets encompassing diverse financial
scenarios [44]. Then, Fin-R1 is established based on Qwen2.5-7B-
Instruct, using supervised fine-tuning and the Group Relative Policy
Optimization algorithm (GRPO) to enhance the model’s reasoning
capability and standardize its output format. Results indicate that
Fin-R1 achieves superior performance on financial question-answer
tasks. Fin-O1 further evaluated the effectiveness of using different
RL algorithms (DPO, PPO, GRPO) to improve model reasoning ca-
pabilities. The study found that GRPO consistently yields reliable
gains, whereas PPO and DPO were less effective. These results high-
light the importance of targeted data and specialized optimization
over merely increasing model scale [58].
These findings underscore the necessity for specialized data,
tailored models, and domain-specific optimization techniques.
4.3.2 Multimodal retrieval-augment generation(MRAG). The
ability to retrieve relevant information efficiently from a large
database is crucial for the success of FinAI systems. Enhancing
retrieval-augmented generation capabilities will enable more pre-
cise and contextually aware responses from AI models, significantly
improving their usefulness in complex financial decision-making
processes.
4.3.3 Customizing pretrained models to use scenarios . Cus-
tomizing pre-trained models to specific scenarios can significantly
enhance user experience. For instance, trained on a curated dataset,
the Buffett agent could serve as a robo-advisor in Buffett style [72].
Another example is FinGPT search agent that provides personalized
service to users for real-time information retrieval.
4.3.4 Fine-tuning and quantization methods . For general-
purpose LLMs to be effective in finance, they need to be fine-tuned
with domain knowledge that captures the nuances of financial mar-
kets and instruments. Additionally, model quantization should be
considered to optimize inference performance in terms of speed and
resource consumption, ensuring that the models can be deployed
effectively in real-time environments. FinGPT-HPC [42] and Fin-
LoRA [72] are two examples of applying quantization techniques
in the fine-tuning process.
4.3.5 Mixture of Experts (MoE). The MoE architecture replaces
a single large foundation model with multiple smaller specialized
models [5, 65]. It decomposes complex problems into simpler tasks,
with different models collaborating to determine the assignment
of each input. This approach enables the model to handle larger
input data volumes without increasing computational costs. There-
fore, MoE enables greater model capacity and improved scalability,
making it feasible to develop large multimodal financial foundation
models with efficiency [24].
4.3.6 Federated Learning. FL offers two benefits: 1) protecting
the privacy of proprietary financial data [4, 46]; and 2) conserving
computing resources during the fine-tuning stage [36]. In a feder-
ated learning environment, the DP-LoRA method [43] provided a
LoRA-based fine-tuning method for financial and medical scenarios
while adding noise to protect data privacy.
5 Challenges and Opportunities: Secure FinAI
Readiness and Governance
Adopting MFFMs in real-life scenarios will face several challenges,
while presenting research opportunities.
5.1 Proprietary Multimodal Financial Data
Proprietary data are important for financial analysis and decision-
making because they provide unique insights.
• Internal trading data: The financial institutions have the capa-
bility to track and analyze their transaction data, offering insights
into behavioral patterns and market trends.
• Credit scoring data: Financial entities possess data regarding
the credit histories of individuals and corporations, which is
essential for risk management.
• Market research data: Data gathered through specialized mar-
ket research or customer feedback can aid financial firms in
understanding consumer demands and market dynamics.
• Real-time streaming data: Certain institutions have access to
real-time transaction flow data, which significantly facilitates
algorithmic trading.
• Private financial reports: Some companies may have access
to confidential financial information about partners or potential
investment targets.
• Proprietary economic indicators: Large institutions may de-
velop their own macroeconomic or microeconomic indicators
based on exclusive datasets and analyses.
• Alternative data: This includes satellite imagery, mobile app
data, and social media activities, which can provide additional
perspectives and information for investment decisions.
Synthetic Multimodal Data. The training of MFFMs has two
challenges: 1) Data privacy - the sensitivity of financial data limits
its use in constructing training datasets; 2) Data quality - a scarcity
of high-quality multimodal financial data, with the existing data
mainly consisting of <Chart Image - Text> pairs that lack balanced
representation from various modalities. These challenges constrain
the further development of MFFMs’ capabilities. Therefore, en-
hancing the diversity and quality of multimodal financial data has
become a critical need. Synthetic Multimodal Data provides a po-
tential solution to these issues.
Synthetic data [1] is from a generative process that learns the
properties of real data but cannot be traced back to the raw data
sources. The objective of synthesizing multimodal data is to gen-
erate data that accurately reflects the real distribution while also
ensuring it cannot be traced back to the original sources to ful-
fill privacy requirements. There have been multiple demos in the
medical field that have used synthetic multimodal data to augment
datasets, which demonstrates the effectiveness of synthesizing mul-
timodal data [55, 77]. However, in the financial domain, Potluru
et al. [57] provides a comprehensive review of the field of financial
data synthesis and points out the current lack of efficient multi-
modal data synthesis methods. This highlights the challenges and
opportunities of synthetic multimodal financial data.


[Page 15]
Multimodal Financial Foundation Models (MFFMs):
Progress, Prospects, and Challenges ICAIF 24, Nov. 15, NY, USA
5.2 Digital Regulatory Reporting (DRR)
A chatbot with multimodal capabilities [ 73][70] helps automate
the financial regulatory process. For example, when lawyers per-
form case studies, chatbots can quickly search and summarize rele-
vant legal provisions and historical cases, saving time over manual
searches. When accountants prepare financial statements, chat-
bots can assist in checking compliance with generally accepted
accounting principles (GAAP).
However, the financial regulatory landscape presents unique
challenges to MFFMs. First, the complex framework and overlap-
ping jurisdictions of financial regulation make the compliance pro-
cess complex. In the European Union (EU), the European Supervi-
sory Authorities (ESAs) need to collaborate closely with national
regulators to maintain a cohesive regulatory environment across
Member States [11, 15]. The U.S. financial regulatory framework is
fragmented, comprising federal and state laws. It involves various
entities, including federal agencies, state regulators, interagency
bodies, and international regulatory fora, with overlapping juris-
dictions [28]. Second, financial regulation requires processing mul-
timodal data from different sources. This includes structured data,
such as SQL databases and XBRL filings; unstructured data, such
as regulatory texts; dynamic and noisy transaction data; and code
in financial product management systems. The format and com-
plexity of each data type vary greatly, which creates a challenging
environment for AI compliance.
XBRL: eXtensible Business Reporting Language (XBRL) is an
open international standard for business reporting, in order to
streamline financial data creation, dissemination, and analysis.
XBRL facilitates information exchange among investors, regula-
tory bodies, and market participants, boosting market transparency
and regulatory compliance. Over the last two decades, most global
economies have adopted XBRL for financial information sharing.
However, the complexity of XBRL necessitates specialized knowl-
edge for proper understanding and analysis, posing a steep learning
curve for businesses and a challenge for widespread accessibility
by the general public.
An XBRL agent [21] will simplify data aggregation and support
informed decision-making. It may provide users with easy access
to financial intelligence. How we interact with financial data is no
longer the exclusive domain of a few individual experts but a valu-
able resource for everyone. On the FinanceBench dataset, a public
dataset comprising SEC document-related questions (150 openly
available sample questions), [21] evaluated the current AI ChatBots
(e.g., ChatGPT, LLama2, FinGPT). The results show that its accuracy
in answering financial questions is only about 19% 30%, which is
far from the professional level. The errors may come from several
aspects: 1). Ambiguity in complex financial terminology; 2). Errors
in interpreting and extracting data from financial documents; 3).
Calculation errors (e.g., financial ratio calculation and aggregation).
Common Domain Model (CDM): The Common Domain Model
(CDM), a standardized, machine-readable/machine-executable data
and process model for multiple financial products, is a promising
fundamental solution to address the above challenges. Developing
a CDM for XBRL using the Multimodal Large Language Model
can handle various document formats, including PDFs, scanned
documents, and webpages. High-quality document reading can
effectively reduce errors during document reading and support
financial documents in diverse scenarios. Furthermore, using MM-
LLMs as the backbone and combining multiple external tools or
RAG techniques to construct a standard agentic workflow can miti-
gate ambiguity in financial terminology and numerical calculation
errors during format conversion.
5.3 Ethical Challenges
There are intensified ethical concerns with MFFMs. Mishandling
sensitive information and thus making unfair, biased judgments can
be disastrous to financial institutions. Analysts who trust flawed
MFFMs will make bad investment decisions and improper risk as-
sessments. Small missteps can cause significant client dissatisfaction
and negative media attention.
Persistent ethical issues include:
• Security and privacy: It is vital that FinLLMs have airtight se-
curity to prevent leakage of sensitive information. Example:
Samsung employees accidentally leaked company secrets when
prompting ChatGPT for help.
• Copyright infringement: FinLLMs trained on Internet data are not
allowed to output copyrighted data to end users. Example: The
New York Times sued OpenAI and Microsoft for using millions
of its articles; Perplexity was accused of using articles from The
Wall Street Journal or The New York Post to populate its RAG
database and generate responses to user queries.
• Systematic bias: In decision-making processes, FinLLMs’ sys-
tematic bias may lead to unfair discrimination towards certain
racial groups. According to Zillow and Consumer Reports, LLMs
may quote African Americans at higher prices in home mort-
gages and car insurance due to historical segregation towards
disaster-prone areas.
• Transparency, explainability, and accountability: It is important
to ensure that FinLLMs are transparent, explainable, and account-
able, providing clear responses, especially in finance where every
decision has significant implications. J.P. Morgan Chase estab-
lished its firmwide Explainable AI Center of Excellence (XAI
COE) for research on explainability and fairness in finance.
Newly-emerging ethical issues include:
• Truthfulness: LLMs consistently hallucinate, creating false state-
ments. In business and finance, hallucinations are problematic
because LLMs’ output must exactly match information extracted
from earnings reports when queried. Microsoft faced backlash
when Bing AI hallucinated when analyzing Gap and Lululemon’s
earnings reports during a demo.
• Sycophancy: LLMs demonstrate sycophancy, catering their out-
puts to match user beliefs rather than being truthful. Sycophancy
is problematic when it causes inaccurate confirmation of financial
analysts’ and accountants’ math.
• Compliance with professional norms: LLM responses must follow
professional norms to avoid implicit toxicity in training data. This
is vital to preserve company culture and public relations.
• Law and regulatory compliance: FinLLMs must comply with cur-
rent financial laws and regulations when making decisions and
chatting with end users. According to the Consumer Financial


[Page 16]
ICAIF 24, Nov. 15, NY, USA Xiao-Yang Liu Yanglet, Yupeng Cao, and Li Deng
ChatBot
FinGPT-Powered Agents
User
ZKP
Blockchain
Query
Output
Risks
Information Leaked to Hosted Model
Local Files:
Income Sheet,
10K Filings
MCP 
Interface 
MCP 
Interface 
MCP 
Interface 
MCP 
Interface 
Backend 
Database 
Model 
(e.g. ChatGPT) 
API
HTTP
Misinformation 
Lack of source data access control
ZKP
Hallucination Financial Website 
Social Media 
Controls
Zero Knowledge Proofs 
Blockchain
Figure 9: Guardrail framework for FinGPT-powered agents using Zero-Knowledge Proofs (ZKPs) and blockchain technologies.
Protection Bureau, FinLLMs must comply with regulations in op-
erations like fraud detection, citing concerns like discrimination
against minority racial groups.
5.4 Misinformation and Hallucination
In the financial domain, the accuracy of information is important
for the integrity of market operations, risk management, compli-
ance, and financial decisions. There are two sources of inaccurate
financial information: dissemination of misinformation and hallu-
cination from the model’s output.
Misinformation is from various media channels [ 61] and the
misuse of LLMs to generate misinformation [9, 10, 96]. Detecting
financial misinformation is a challenge. To address this issue, FMDL-
lama [45] fine-tuned the LLaMA-3 model on the Fin-Fact dataset
[61] to detect financial misinformation. This case presents a fea-
sible solution. By leveraging LLMs, an agentic framework can be
developed to detect dynamically evolving financial misinformation.
Hallucination is factually incorrect output from LLMs due to their
training on vast and diverse datasets. Ensuring the accuracy and
reliability of LLM-generated outputs is crucial for their application
in the financial industry. Kang and Liu [25] quantified financial
hallucinations and explored several potential solutions to mitigate
them, including few-shot learning, decoding by contrasting layers,
and RAG.
5.5 Guardrail Framework for FinAgents
Wide adoption of FinAgents raises concerns about privacy, secu-
rity, and trust. We first outline the potential risks inherent in the
FinAgent workflow. Then, we propose a guardrail framework that
leverages zero-knowledge proofs (ZKPs) and blockchain technol-
ogy. Blockchain and ZKPs ensure that FinAgents’ actions remain
secure, verifiable, and immutable, fostering transparency and trust.
5.5.1 Threats and Risks in the FinAgent workflow. The three
FinAgent prototypes in Section 3.1 follow an agentic pipeline: An
agent calls various tools via the MCP protocol to retrieve relevant
content from local files, backend databases, remote models, and the
Internet. We identify several major risks across different financial
scenarios (red points in Fig. 9), referring to Linux’s AI Readiness
Governance Framework:
• Information leaked to host model . Enterprise users may fre-
quently employ FinGPT search agent to process local files (e.g.,
income sheet) for compliance tasks like internal audits, risk as-
sessment, or regulatory reporting. These files contain personally
identifiable information or commercially sensitive data. Corpo-
rate employees and students increasingly rely on AI tutors for
financial knowledge from local textbooks. These books usually
have copyright restrictions. During multi-round dialogues, the
sensitive local files or copyrighted content may leak to external
models (red line and point 1○ in Fig. 9).
• Misinformation. Users employ FinGPT search agent to obtain
real-time information from financial websites and social media.
However, the generated responses may contain misinformation
and biased content (orange line and point 2○ in Fig. 9).
• Lack of source data access control . FinGPT-powered agent
could access external data sources (e.g., subscription-based web-
sites). However, since these sources may enforce different access
control policies, users might inadvertently access data that they
are not authorized to retrieve directly from the original source.
This unauthorized access may also lead to copyright issues (or-
ange line and point 3○ in Fig. 9).
• Hallucination. LLM-based output may contain hallucination
content, which refers to information that appears plausible but
is factually incorrect. Inaccurate output can lead to costly errors,
operational inefficiencies, and misinformed decisions (point 4○
in Fig. 9).


[Page 17]
Multimodal Financial Foundation Models (MFFMs):
Progress, Prospects, and Challenges ICAIF 24, Nov. 15, NY, USA
To mitigate these identified risks, integrating Zero-Knowledge
Proof (ZKP) protocols and blockchain technologies represents a
promising solution. These technologies form the foundation of a
novel guardrail framework designed specifically for financial agents,
as illustrated in Fig. 9 (blue line, points 1○ - 4○).
5.5.2 Zero Knowledge Proofs (ZKPs) for Privacy-Preserving.
Zero-Knowledge Proofs (ZKPs) are cryptographic protocols that
let a prover convince a verifier of a statement’s correctness with-
out disclosing any underlying secrets. The ZKPs ensure three key
properties: completeness (an honest execution always produces a
verifiable proof), soundness (no one can forge a valid proof with-
out performing the correct computation), and zero-knowledge
(the verifier learns nothing beyond the truth of the statement). zk-
LLM [67] has demonstrated that ZKP protocols help protect the
privacy of the large language model parameters (usually considered
as intellectual property of model producers). For LLMs with 13B
parameters, zkLLM can verify the inference process in less than 15
minutes, and the generated proof file has less than 200 KB.
To ensure privacy in the agent workflow, the agent generates a
ZKP proof file and uploads it to the blockchain (blue line2○), demon-
strating that the actions (search steps, inference steps, and output
procedure) strictly adhere to pre-established inference schemes
without exposing sensitive or proprietary data to remote model
(red line and point 1○). To enhance access control for external source
data, the external participants generate a ZKP file for copyright
(blue line 4○). When the local agent takes actions, copyright per-
missions are granted by the blockchain, preventing unauthorized
retrieval of external content (orange line and point 3○).
5.5.3 Blockchain-Layered Agent Life Cycle. The generated
ZKP protocol files, agent updates, copyright policies, and regulatory
documents are recorded on a permissioned blockchain (e.g., Hyper-
ledger Fabric or Corda). Participants interact with the blockchain
by submitting cryptographic hashes referencing agent updates, in-
ference steps, or compliance logs (blue line 1○ - 4○). Agents update
trusted source lists (blue line 3○) to avoid misinformation from
external content (orange line, point 3○) and load inference schemes
(blue line 1○) to prevent hallucinations (point 4○). This creates an
immutable audit log, enabling stakeholders to verify agent compli-
ance with approved procedures.
These two components jointly enable FinGPT-powered agents
to incorporate local data securely and produce on-chain verifiable
proofs of correctness and compliance. By preserving confidentiality
of sensitive data (via ZKPs) while anchoring essential references in
a tamper-proof ledger (via blockchain), our approach harmonizes
the conflicting needs of safety, confidentiality, transparency, and
regulatory oversight.
6 Discussion and Conclusion
This paper offers a comprehensive overview of Multimodal Finan-
cial Foundation Models (MFFMs), highlighting their state of readi-
ness. First, we review the multimodal financial data and application
scenarios. Then, we describe the progress and future prospects of
MFFMs. We further analyze the challenges and opportunities faced
by MFFMs to achieve AI readiness.
By summarizing the current state of readiness, multimodal fi-
nancial application scenarios, multimodal financial data, and the
development of MFFMs, this paper aims to inspire future research
and innovation in both the academic and financial industries.
As we navigate the integration of machine learning in business
and finance, it is paramount to address the multifaceted challenges
that arise from the unique characteristics of multimodal financial
data and the new capabilities of MFFMs. Here, we outline strategic
directions and considerations that will enhance the financial AI
readiness for individuals and institutions:
• Multilingual and multimodal . Financial data is inherently
complex, often presented in various modes, including text, numer-
ical data, images, and more. An effective financial AI framework
must be capable of interpreting and integrating these diverse
multimodal data seamlessly. Furthermore, the global nature of
finance demands multilingual capabilities to ensure that insights
can be gleaned from data across different languages and regions.
AI models should be equipped to handle multiple tasks simulta-
neously, such as risk assessment, fraud detection, and customer
service, to provide comprehensive solutions.
• Open datasets and question sets . Open datasets will facilitate
the training of the more Powerful MFFMs. Adding complex open
financial questions into training datasets can further enhance
their reasoning capabilities. Furthermore, Public open datasets
and question sets assist in establishing a standard benchmark for
evaluating MFFMs.
• Open leaderboard of MFFMs and FinAgents . Building an
open leaderboard enables rapid evaluation of the progress and
characteristics of different MFFMs. It will facilitate the develop-
ment of an agentic AI ecosystem.
• Blockchain. Data privacy and protection of model intellec-
tual property are the challenges when developing an agentic
AI ecosystem. Blockchain technology allows multiple organiza-
tions to collaboratively train a shared model while safeguarding
data privacy, preventing leakage of model parameters, and trans-
parently verifying each participant’s contributions.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank Keyi Wang for helping draft Fig. 5.
Xiao-Yang Liu Yanglet acknowledges the support from Columbia’s
SIRS and STAR Program, The Tang Family Fund for Research In-
novations in FinTech, Engineering, and Business Operations. Xiao-
Yang Liu Yanglet also acknowledges the support from the NSF
IUCRC CRAFT Center research grant (CRAFT Grant 22017) for
this research. The opinions expressed in this publication do not
necessarily represent the views of NSF IUCRC CRAFT.
References
[1] Samuel A Assefa, Danial Dervovic, Mahmoud Mahfouz, Robert E Tillman,
Prashant Reddy, and Manuela Veloso. 2020. Generating synthetic data in fi-
nance: opportunities, challenges and pitfalls. In Proceedings of the First ACM
International Conference on AI in Finance . 1–8.
[2] Gagan Bhatia, El Moatez Billah Nagoudi, Hasan Cavusoglu, and Muhammad
Abdul-Mageed. 2024. FinTral: A family of gpt-4 level multimodal financial large
language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.10986 (2024).
[3] Rishi Bommasani, Drew A Hudson, Ehsan Adeli, Russ Altman, Simran Arora,
Sydney von Arx, Michael S Bernstein, Jeannette Bohg, Antoine Bosselut, Emma
Brunskill, et al. 2021. On the opportunities and risks of foundation models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2108.07258 (2021).


[Page 18]
ICAIF 24, Nov. 15, NY, USA Xiao-Yang Liu Yanglet, Yupeng Cao, and Li Deng
[4] David Byrd and Antigoni Polychroniadou. 2020. Differentially private secure
multi-party computation for federated learning in financial applications. In Pro-
ceedings of the first ACM international conference on AI in finance . 1–9.
[5] Weilin Cai, Juyong Jiang, Fan Wang, Jing Tang, Sunghun Kim, and Jiayi Huang.
2024. A survey on mixture of experts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.06204 (2024).
[6] Ethan Callanan, Amarachi Mbakwe, Antony Papadimitriou, Yulong Pei, Mathieu
Sibue, Xiaodan Zhu, Zhiqiang Ma, Xiaomo Liu, and Sameena Shah. 2024. Can
GPT models be Financial Analysts? An Evaluation of ChatGPT and GPT-4 on
mock CFA Exams. In Proceedings of the Eighth Financial Technology and Natural
Language Processing and the 1st Agent AI for Scenario Planning . 23–32.
[7] Yupeng Cao, Zhi Chen, Qingyun Pei, Prashant Kumar, KP Subbalakshmi, and
Papa Momar Ndiaye. 2024. ECC Analyzer: Extract Trading Signal from Earnings
Conference Calls using Large Language Model for Stock Performance Prediction.
ACM ICAIF (2024).
[8] Yupeng Cao, Haohang Li, Yangyang Yu, Shashidhar Reddy Javaji, Yueru He, Jimin
Huang, Zining Zhu, Qianqian Xie, Xiao-yang Liu, Koduvayur Subbalakshmi, et al.
2025. FinAudio: A Benchmark for Audio Large Language Models in Financial
Applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.20990 (2025).
[9] Yupeng Cao, Aishwarya Nair, Nastaran Jamalipour Soofi, Elyon Eyimife, and
Koduvayur Subbalakshmi. 2025. CoSMis: A Hybrid Human-LLM COVID Related
Scientific Misinformation Dataset and LLM pipelines for Detecting Scientific
Misinformation in the Wild. In AAAI 2025 Workshop on Preventing and Detecting
LLM Misinformation (PDLM).
[10] Yupeng Cao, Aishwarya Muralidharan Nair, Elyon Eyimife, Nastaran Jamalipour
Soofi, KP Subbalakshmi, John R Wullert II, Chumki Basu, and David Shallcross.
2024. Can Large Language Models Detect Misinformation in Scientific News
Reporting? arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.14268 (2024).
[11] Olha O. Cherednychenko. 2021. Two Sides of the Same Coin: EU Financial
Regulation and Private Law. European Business Organization Law Review 22
(2021), 147–172.
[12] Marcos Lopez De Prado. 2018. Advances in financial machine learning . John
Wiley & Sons.
[13] Tim Dettmers, Artidoro Pagnoni, Ari Holtzman, and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2023.
QLoRA: Efficient finetuning of quantized llms. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 36 (2023), 10088–10115.
[14] Han Ding, Yinheng Li, Junhao Wang, and Hang Chen. 2024. Large Language
Model Agent in Financial Trading: A Survey. arXiv 2408.06361 (2024).
[15] Directorate-General for Financial Stability, Financial Services and Capital Markets
Union. 2022. Report on the operation of the European Supervisory Authorities
on the operation of the European Supervisory Agencies (ESAs).
[16] Zane Durante, Qiuyuan Huang, Naoki Wake, Ran Gong, Jae Sung Park, Bidipta
Sarkar, Rohan Taori, Yusuke Noda, Demetri Terzopoulos, Yejin Choi, et al. 2024.
Agent ai: Surveying the horizons of multimodal interaction. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2401.03568 (2024).
[17] George Foster, Chris Olsen, and Terry Shevlin. 1984. Earnings releases, anomalies,
and the behavior of security returns. Accounting Review (1984), 574–603.
[18] Ziliang Gan, Yu Lu, Dong Zhang, Haohan Li, Che Liu, Jian Liu, Ji Liu, Haipang
Wu, Chaoyou Fu, Zenglin Xu, et al . 2024. MME-Finance: A Multimodal Fi-
nance Benchmark for Expert-level Understanding and Reasoning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2411.03314 (2024).
[19] Guinness World Records. 2024. Most users to take an online artificial intel-
ligence lesson in 24 hours. https://www.guinnessworldrecords.com/world-
records/632192-most-users-to-take-an-online-artificial-intelligence-lesson-in-
24-hours. Accessed: 2024-11-18.
[20] Ben Hambly, Renyuan Xu, and Huining Yang. 2023. Recent advances in rein-
forcement learning in finance. Mathematical Finance 33, 3 (2023), 437–503.
[21] Shijie Han, Haoqiang Kang, Bo Jin, Xiao-Yang Liu, and Steve Yang. 2024. XBRL-
Agent: Leveraging Large Language Models for Financial Report Analysis. ACM
International Conference on AI in Finance (2024).
[22] Maximilian Heimstädt. 2017. Openwashing: A decoupling perspective on orga-
nizational transparency. Technological forecasting and social change 125 (2017),
77–86.
[23] Pranab Islam, Anand Kannappan, Douwe Kiela, Rebecca Qian, Nino Scherrer, and
Bertie Vidgen. 2023. FinanceBench: A New Benchmark for Financial Question
Answering. arXiv 2311.11944 (2023).
[24] Satyadhar Joshi. 2025. A Survey of Mixture of Experts Models: Architectures and
Applications in Business and Finance. (2025).
[25] Haoqiang Kang and Xiao-Yang Liu. 2023. Deficiency of large language models
in finance: An empirical examination of hallucination. In I Can’t Believe It’s Not
Better Workshop: Failure Modes in the Age of Foundation Models .
[26] Yaxuan Kong, Yuqi Nie, Xiaowen Dong, John M Mulvey, H Vincent Poor, Qing-
song Wen, and Stefan Zohren. 2024. Large Language Models for Financial and
Investment Management: Applications and Benchmarks. Journal of Portfolio
Management 51, 2 (2024).
[27] Yaxuan Kong, Yuqi Nie, Xiaowen Dong, John M Mulvey, H Vincent Poor, Qing-
song Wen, and Stefan Zohren. 2024. Large Language Models for Financial and
Investment Management: Models. The Journal of Portfolio Management (2024).
[28] Marc Labonte. 2023. Who Regulates Whom? An Overview of the U.S. Financial
Regulatory Framework. Congressional Research Service Report (2023).
[29] Jean Lee, Nicholas Stevens, Soyeon Caren Han, and Minseok Song. 2024. A survey
of large language models in finance (FinLLMs). arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.02315
(2024).
[30] Sang Il Lee and Seong Joon Yoo. 2020. Multimodal deep learning for finance:
integrating and forecasting international stock markets. The Journal of Super-
computing 76 (2020), 8294–8312.
[31] Haohang Li, Yupeng Cao, Yangyang Yu, Shashidhar Reddy Javaji, Zhiyang Deng,
Yueru He, Yuechen Jiang, Zining Zhu, Koduvayur Subbalakshmi, Guojun Xiong,
Jimin Huang, Lingfei Qian, Xueqing Peng, Qianqian Xie, and Jordan W. Suchow.
2024. InvestorBench: A Benchmark for Financial Decision-Making Tasks with
LLM-based Agent. arXiv:2412.18174
[32] Yinheng Li, Shaofei Wang, Han Ding, and Hang Chen. 2023. Large language
models in finance: A survey. In Proceedings of the fourth ACM International
Conference on AI in Finance . 374–382.
[33] Andreas Liesenfeld and Mark Dingemanse. 2024. Rethinking open source gen-
erative AI: open washing and the EU AI Act. In The 2024 ACM Conference on
Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency. 1774–1787.
[34] Shengyuan Lin, Keyi Wang, and Xiao-Yang Liu. 2024. Analyzing Cascading
Outbreak of GameStop Event: A Practical Approach Using Network Analysis and
Large Language Models. In Proceedings of the 5th ACM International Conference
on AI in Finance . 428–436.
[35] Shengyuan Colin Lin, Keyi Wang Felix Tian, Xingjian Zhao, Jimin Huang, Qian-
qian Xie, Luca Borella, Matt White, Christina Dan Wang, Kairong Xiao, Xiao-
Yang Liu Yanglet, and Li Deng. 2024. Open FinLLM Leaderboard: Towards Finan-
cial AI Readiness. International Workshop on Multimodal Financial Foundation
Models (MFFMs), ACM ICAIF (2024).
[36] Tao Liu, Zhi Wang, Hui He, Wei Shi, Liangliang Lin, Ran An, and Chenhao Li.
2023. Efficient and secure federated learning for financial applications. Applied
Sciences 13, 10 (2023), 5877.
[37] Xiao-Yang Liu, Guoxuan Wang, Hongyang Yang, and Daochen Zha. 2023. Data-
centric FinGPT: Democratizing Internet-scale data for financial large language
models. Workshop on Instruction Tuning and Instruction Following, NeurIPS(2023).
[38] Xiao-Yang Liu, Ziyi Xia, Jingyang Rui, Jiechao Gao, Hongyang Yang, Ming Zhu,
Christina Wang, Zhaoran Wang, and Jian Guo. 2022. FinRL-Meta: Market en-
vironments and benchmarks for data-driven financial reinforcement learning.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35 (2022), 1835–1849.
[39] Xiao-Yang Liu, Zhuoran Xiong, Shan Zhong, Hongyang Yang, and Anwar Walid.
2018. Practical deep reinforcement learning approach for stock trading. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1811.07522 (2018).
[40] Xiao-Yang Liu, Hongyang Yang, Qian Chen, Runjia Zhang, Liuqing Yang, Bowen
Xiao, and Christina Dan Wang. 2020. FinRL: A Deep Reinforcement Learning
Library for Automated Stock Trading in Quantitative Finance. CoRR (2020).
[41] Xiao-Yang Liu, Hongyang Yang, Jiechao Gao, and Christina Dan Wang. 2021.
FinRL: Deep reinforcement learning framework to automate trading in quantita-
tive finance. In Proceedings of the second ACM International Conference on AI in
Finance. 1–9.
[42] Xiao-Yang Liu, Jie Zhang, Guoxuan Wang, Weiqing Tong, and Anwar Walid. 2024.
FinGPT-HPC: Efficient Pretraining and Finetuning Large Language Models for
Financial Applications with High-Performance Computing, arXiv 2402.13533.
(ICDCS version) Efficient Pretraining and Finetuning of Quantized LLMs with
Low-rank Structure. IEEE ICDCS (2024).
[43] Xiao-Yang Liu, Rongyi Zhu, Daochen Zha, Jiechao Gao, Shan Zhong, Matt White,
and Meikang Qiu. 2025. Differentially private low-rank adaptation of large
language model using federated learning. ACM Transactions on Management
Information Systems 16, 2 (2025), 1–24.
[44] Zhaowei Liu, Xin Guo, Fangqi Lou, Lingfeng Zeng, Jinyi Niu, Zixuan Wang, Jiajie
Xu, Weige Cai, Ziwei Yang, Xueqian Zhao, et al. 2025. Fin-r1: A large language
model for financial reasoning through reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2503.16252 (2025).
[45] Zhiwei Liu, Xin Zhang, Kailai Yang, Qianqian Xie, Jimin Huang, and Sophia
Ananiadou. 2024. Fmdllama: Financial misinformation detection based on large
language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.16452 (2024).
[46] Guodong Long, Yue Tan, Jing Jiang, and Chengqi Zhang. 2020. Federated learning
for open banking. In Federated learning: privacy and incentive. Springer, 240–254.
[47] Mahmoud Mahfouz, Ethan Callanan, Mathieu Sibue, Antony Papadimitriou,
Zhiqiang Ma, Xiaomo Liu, and Xiaodan Zhu. 2024. The State of the Art of Large
Language Models on Chartered Financial Analyst Exams. In Proceedings of the
2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: Industry
Track. 1068–1082.
[48] Puneet Mathur, Atula Neerkaje, Malika Chhibber, Ramit Sawhney, Fuming Guo,
Franck Dernoncourt, Sanghamitra Dutta, and Dinesh Manocha. 2022. Monopoly:
Financial prediction from monetary policy conference videos using multimodal
cues. In ACM International Conference on Multimedia . 2276–2285.
[49] Mark Mazumder, Colby Banbury, Xiaozhe Yao, Bojan Karlaš, William Gaviria Ro-
jas, Sudnya Diamos, Greg Diamos, Lynn He, Alicia Parrish, Hannah Rose Kirk,
et al. 2023. Dataperf: Benchmarks for data-centric ai development. Advances in


[Page 19]
Multimodal Financial Foundation Models (MFFMs):
Progress, Prospects, and Challenges ICAIF 24, Nov. 15, NY, USA
Neural Information Processing Systems 36 (2023), 5320–5347.
[50] Irene Monasterolo. 2020. Climate change and the financial system.Annual Review
of Resource Economics 12, 1 (2020), 299–320.
[51] Natapong Nitarach, Warit Sirichotedumrong, Panop Pitchayarthorn, Pittawat
Taveekitworachai, Potsawee Manakul, and Kunat Pipatanakul. 2025. FinCoT:
Grounding Chain-of-Thought in Expert Financial Reasoning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2506.16123 (2025).
[52] Kun Ouyang, Yi Liu, Shicheng Li, Ruihan Bao, Keiko Harimoto, and Xu Sun. 2024.
Modal-adaptive Knowledge-enhanced Graph-based Financial Prediction from
Monetary Policy Conference Calls with LLM. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.16055
(2024).
[53] Jaisal Patel, Andy Zhu, Felix Tian, Sarah Huang, Ethan Chang, Christina Dan
Wang, Kairong Xiao, and Xiao-Yang Liu Yanglet. 2024. High-Quality Finan-
cial Benchmark (QFinBen): Can LLMs Earn Degrees and Certificates? Interna-
tional Workshop on Multimodal Financial Foundation Models (MFFMs), ACM ICAIF
(2024).
[54] Xueqing Peng, Lingfei Qian, Yan Wang, Ruoyu Xiang, Yueru He, Yang Ren,
Mingyang Jiang, Jeff Zhao, Huan He, Yi Han, et al. 2025. MultiFinBen: A Multilin-
gual, Multimodal, and Difficulty-Aware Benchmark for Financial LLM Evaluation.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.14028 (2025).
[55] Vasileios C Pezoulas, Dimitrios I Zaridis, Eugenia Mylona, Christos Androutsos,
Kosmas Apostolidis, Nikolaos S Tachos, and Dimitrios I Fotiadis. 2024. Synthetic
data generation methods in healthcare: A review on open-source tools and
methods. Computational and structural biotechnology journal (2024).
[56] Matija Piškorec, Nino Antulov-Fantulin, Petra Kralj Novak, Igor Mozetič, Miha
Grčar, Irena Vodenska, and Tomislav Šmuc. 2014. Cohesiveness in financial news
and its relation to market volatility. Scientific reports 4, 1 (2014), 5038.
[57] Vamsi K Potluru, Daniel Borrajo, Andrea Coletta, Niccolò Dalmasso, Yousef
El-Laham, Elizabeth Fons, Mohsen Ghassemi, Sriram Gopalakrishnan, Vikesh
Gosai, Eleonora Kreačić, et al. 2023. Synthetic data applications in finance. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2401.00081 (2023).
[58] Lingfei Qian, Weipeng Zhou, Yan Wang, Xueqing Peng, Han Yi, Jimin Huang,
Qianqian Xie, and Jianyun Nie. 2025. Fino1: On the transferability of reasoning
enhanced llms to finance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.08127 (2025).
[59] Yu Qin and Yi Yang. 2019. What you say and how you say it matters: Predicting
stock volatility using verbal and vocal cues. In Association for Computational
Linguistics. 390–401.
[60] Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Christopher D Manning, Stefano
Ermon, and Chelsea Finn. 2023. Direct preference optimization: Your language
model is secretly a reward model. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 36 (2023), 53728–53741.
[61] Aman Rangapur, Haoran Wang, Ling Jian, and Kai Shu. 2023. Fin-fact: A bench-
mark dataset for multimodal financial fact checking and explanation generation.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.08793 (2023).
[62] Marco Schreyer, Hanchi Gu, Kevin Moffitt, and Miklos A Vasarhelyi. 2024. Artifi-
cial Intelligence Agentic Auditing. A vailable at SSRN 4909147 (2024).
[63] Robert P Schumaker, Yulei Zhang, Chun-Neng Huang, and Hsinchun Chen. 2012.
Evaluating sentiment in financial news articles. Decision Support Systems 53, 3
(2012), 458–464.
[64] Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Junxiao Song, Xiao Bi, Haowei
Zhang, Mingchuan Zhang, YK Li, Yang Wu, et al. 2024. Deepseekmath: Pushing
the limits of mathematical reasoning in open language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2402.03300 (2024).
[65] Noam Shazeer, Azalia Mirhoseini, Krzysztof Maziarz, Andy Davis, Quoc Le,
Geoffrey Hinton, and Jeff Dean. 2017. Outrageously large neural networks: The
sparsely-gated mixture-of-experts layer. arXiv preprint arXiv:1701.06538 (2017).
[66] Nicholas Stern. 2008. The economics of climate change. American Economic
Review 98, 2 (2008), 1–37.
[67] Haochen Sun, Jason Li, and Hongyang Zhang. 2024. zkllm: Zero knowledge
proofs for large language models. In Proceedings of the 2024 on ACM SIGSAC
Conference on Computer and Communications Security . 4405–4419.
[68] Shuo Sun, Rundong Wang, and Bo An. 2023. Reinforcement learning for quan-
titative trading. ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology 14, 3
(2023), 1–29.
[69] Dr Gattaiah Tadoori and Yakaiah Guguloth. 2019. An Introduction to Quan-
tamental Investing. In Two Day National Seminar on" Fin-tech Adoption in the
Indian BFSI Sector-Opportunities and Challenges . 19–20.
[70] Felix Tian, Ajay Byadgi, Daniel Kim, Daochen Zha, Kairong Xiao, and Xiao-Yang
Liu. 2024. Customized FinGPT Search Agents Using Foundation Models. ACM
International Conference on AI in Finance (2024).
[71] Bin Wang, Xunlong Zou, Geyu Lin, Shuo Sun, Zhuohan Liu, Wenyu Zhang,
Zhengyuan Liu, AiTi Aw, and Nancy F Chen. 2024. Audiobench: A universal
benchmark for audio large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.16020
(2024).
[72] Dannong Wang, Jaisal Patel, Daochen Zha, Steve Y Yang, and Xiao-Yang Liu.
2025. FinLoRA: Benchmarking LoRA Methods for Fine-Tuning LLMs on Financial
Datasets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.19819 (2025).
[73] Keyi Wang, Sarah Huang, Charlie Shen, Kaiwen He, Felix Tian, Jaisal Patel,
Christina Dan Wang, Kairong Xiao, and Xiao-Yang Liu Yanglet. 2024. Professional
Readiness of LLMs in Financial Regulations? A Report of Regulations Challenge
at COLING 2025. International Workshop on Multimodal Financial Foundation
Models (MFFMs), ACM ICAIF (2024).
[74] Shuting Wang, Jiejun Tan, Zhicheng Dou, and Ji-Rong Wen. 2024. OmniEval:
An Omnidirectional and Automatic RAG Evaluation Benchmark in Financial
Domain. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.13018 (2024).
[75] Saizhuo Wang, Hang Yuan, Leon Zhou, Lionel M Ni, Heung-Yeung Shum, and
Jian Guo. 2023. Alpha-gpt: Human-ai interactive alpha mining for quantitative
investment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.00016 (2023).
[76] Ziao Wang, Yuhang Li, Junda Wu, Jaehyeon Soon, and Xiaofeng Zhang. 2023.
FinVis-GPT: A multimodal large language model for financial chart analysis.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.01430 (2023).
[77] Philipp Wendland, Colin Birkenbihl, Marc Gomez-Freixa, Meemansa Sood, Maik
Kschischo, and Holger Fröhlich. 2022. Generation of realistic synthetic data using
multimodal neural ordinary differential equations. NPJ Digital Medicine 5, 1
(2022), 122.
[78] Michel Wermelinger. 2023. Using GitHub Copilot to solve simple programming
problems. In Proceedings of the 54th ACM Technical Symposium on Computer
Science Education V. 1. 172–178.
[79] Matt White, Ibrahim Haddad, Cailean Osborne, Xiao-Yang Liu Yanglet, Ahmed
Abdelmonsef, Sachin Varghese, and Arnaud Le Hors. 2024. The model openness
framework: Promoting completeness and openness for reproducibility, trans-
parency and usability in Artificial Intelligence. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.13784
(2024).
[80] David Gray Widder, Meredith Whittaker, and Sarah Myers West. 2024. Why
‘open’AI systems are actually closed, and why this matters. Nature 635, 8040
(2024), 827–833.
[81] Julia Wiesinger, Patrick Marlow, and Vladimir Vuskovic. 2024. Agents. (2024).
[82] Shijie Wu, Ozan Irsoy, Steven Lu, Vadim Dabravolski, Mark Dredze, Sebastian
Gehrmann, Prabhanjan Kambadur, David Rosenberg, and Gideon Mann. 2023.
BloombergGPT: A Large Language Model for Finance. arXiv 2303.17564 (2023).
[83] Qianqian Xie, Weiguang Han, Zhengyu Chen, Ruoyu Xiang, Xiao Zhang, Yueru
He, Mengxi Xiao, Dong Li, Yongfu Dai, Duanyu Feng, Yijing Xu, Haoqiang
Kang, Ziyan Kuang, Chenhan Yuan, Kailai Yang, Zheheng Luo, Tianlin Zhang,
Zhiwei Liu, Guojun Xiong, Zhiyang Deng, Yuechen Jiang, Zhiyuan Yao, Haohang
Li, Yangyang Yu, Gang Hu, Jiajia Huang, Xiao-Yang Liu, Alejandro Lopez-Lira,
Benyou Wang, Yanzhao Lai, Hao Wang, Min Peng, Sophia Ananiadou, and Jimin
Huang. 2024. FinBen: A Holistic Financial Benchmark for Large Language Models.
NeurIPS, Special Track on Datasets and Benchmarks (2024).
[84] Qianqian Xie, Weiguang Han, Xiao Zhang, Yanzhao Lai, Min Peng, Alejandro
Lopez-Lira, and Jimin Huang. 2023. PIXIU: a large language model, instruction
data and evaluation benchmark for finance. InProceedings of the 37th International
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems . 33469–33484.
[85] Qianqian Xie, Dong Li, Mengxi Xiao, Zihao Jiang, Ruoyu Xiang, Xiao Zhang,
Zhengyu Chen, Yueru He, Weiguang Han, Yuzhe Yang, Shunian Chen, Yifei
Zhang, Lihang Shen, Daniel Kim, Zhiwei Liu, Zheheng Luo, Yangyang Yu, Yu-
peng Cao, Zhiyang Deng, Zhiyuan Yao, Haohang Li, Duanyu Feng, Yongfu Dai,
VijayaSai Somasundaram, Peng Lu, Yilun Zhao, Yitao Long, Guojun Xiong, Kaleb
Smith, Honghai Yu, Yanzhao Lai, Min Peng, Jianyun Nie, Jordan W. Suchow,
Xiao-Yang Liu, Benyou Wang, Alejandro Lopez-Lira, Jimin Huang, and Sophia
Ananiadou. 2024. Open-FinLLMs: Open Multimodal Large Language Models for
Financial Applications. arXiv 2408.11878 (2024).
[86] Zhuohan Xie, Dhruv Sahnan, Debopriyo Banerjee, Georgi Georgiev, Rushil
Thareja, Hachem Madmoun, Jinyan Su, Aaryamonvikram Singh, Yuxia Wang,
Rui Xing, et al. 2025. FinChain: A Symbolic Benchmark for Verifiable Chain-of-
Thought Financial Reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.02515 (2025).
[87] Siqiao Xue, Tingting Chen, Fan Zhou, Qingyang Dai, Zhixuan Chu, and
Hongyuan Mei. 2024. FAMMA: A Benchmark for Financial Domain Multilingual
Multimodal Question Answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.04526 (2024).
[88] Hongyang Yang, Xiao-Yang Liu, and Christina Dan Wang. 2023. FinGPT: Open-
Source Financial Large Language Models. Symposium on FinLLM, IJCAI (2023).
[89] Linyi Yang, Tin Lok James Ng, Barry Smyth, and Riuhai Dong. 2020. Html:
Hierarchical transformer-based multi-task learning for volatility prediction. In
Proceedings of The Web Conference 2020 . 441–451.
[90] Yangyang Yu, Haohang Li, Zhi Chen, Yuechen Jiang, Yang Li, Denghui Zhang,
Rong Liu, Jordan W Suchow, and Khaldoun Khashanah. 2024. FinMem: A
performance-enhanced LLM trading agent with layered memory and character
design. In Proceedings of the AAAI Symposium Series , Vol. 3. 595–597.
[91] Yangyang Yu, Zhiyuan Yao, Haohang Li, Zhiyang Deng, Yupeng Cao, Zhi Chen,
Jordan W Suchow, Rong Liu, Zhenyu Cui, Denghui Zhang, et al. 2024. FinCon: A
Synthesized LLM Multi-Agent System with Conceptual Verbal Reinforcement
for Enhanced Financial Decision Making. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.06567 (2024).
[92] Daochen Zha, Zaid Pervaiz Bhat, Kwei-Herng Lai, Fan Yang, Zhimeng Jiang,
Shaochen Zhong, and Xia Hu. 2025. Data-centric artificial intelligence: A survey.
Comput. Surveys 57, 5 (2025), 1–42.


[Page 20]
ICAIF 24, Nov. 15, NY, USA Xiao-Yang Liu Yanglet, Yupeng Cao, and Li Deng
[93] Boyu Zhang, Hongyang Yang, and Xiao-Yang Liu. 2023. Instruct-FinGPT: Fi-
nancial Sentiment Analysis by Instruction Tuning of General-Purpose Large
Language Models. FinLLM Symposium at IJCAI (2023).
[94] Boyu Zhang, Hongyang Yang, Tianyu Zhou, Ali Babar, and Xiao-Yang Liu. 2023.
Enhancing Financial Sentiment Analysis via Retrieval Augmented Large Lan-
guage Models. ACM International Conference on AI in Finance (ICAIF) 2023 (2023).
[95] Huaqin Zhao, Zhengliang Liu, Zihao Wu, Yiwei Li, Tianze Yang, Peng Shu,
Shaochen Xu, Haixing Dai, Lin Zhao, Gengchen Mai, Ninghao Liu, and Tianming
Liu. 2024. Revolutionizing Finance with LLMs: An Overview of Applications and
Insights. arXiv 2401.11641 (2024).
[96] Jiawei Zhou, Yixuan Zhang, Qianni Luo, Andrea G Parker, and Munmun
De Choudhury. 2023. Synthetic lies: Understanding ai-generated misinformation
and evaluating algorithmic and human solutions. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–20.
A Terminology
Multimodal Financial Foundation Models (MFFMs) is an intersec-
tion field of foundation models and finance. To facilitate readers
from various backgrounds, Table 7 lists terminologies for founda-
tion models and agents, while Table 8 for finance.


[Page 21]
Multimodal Financial Foundation Models (MFFMs):
Progress, Prospects, and Challenges ICAIF 24, Nov. 15, NY, USA
Key Terms Explanations
Transformer A transformer is a neural network architecture that utilizes the multi-head attention mechanism.
Large Language Model (LLM) LLM is a type of machine learning model for human-like text understanding and generation.
Pre-training Pre-training refers to the initial training phase where a model learns general features from a large dataset.
Fine-tuning Since a pre-trained LLM has a large number of parameters, trained on a huge dataset over millions of GPU hours, it
is natural to employ a fine-tuning method to scale such a GPT model to hundreds of use scenarios.
Generative Pre-trained Transformer (GPT) GPT is a family of LLMs based on a transformer architecture.
Prompt engineering The process of structuring an instruction in order to produce the best possible output from an LLM model.
Zero-Shot Prompting An LLM is given a task without examples or training on that task, relying on LLM’s pre-existing knowledge to
generate a response.
Few-Shot Prompting The prompt of providing a generative model with a few examples of a task to guide its output.
Chain-of-Thoughts (CoT) A prompt engineering strategy to guide language models to handle complex reasoning tasks. For example, write
the reasoning guidance in the prompt.
In-Context Learning (ICL) ICL is a new learning paradigm where a language model observes a few examples and directly outputs the test
input’s prediction.
Foundation Model A foundation model is a machine learning or deep learning model that is trained on vast datasets so it can be applied
across a wide range of downstream tasks.
FinLLM A foundation model for financial applications.
Multimodal Multimodal means “having several modalities", and a "modality" refers to a type of input or output, such as video,
image, audio, text, proprioception, etc.
Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) RAG is a process of optimizing the output of an LLM. It references an authoritative knowledge base outside of its
training data sources before generating a response.
Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) LoRA is a popular and efficient training technique that significantly reduces the number of trainable parameters.
QLoRA QLoRA is the extended version of LoRA, which works by quantizing the precision of the weight parameters in the
pre-trained LLM to 4-bit precision.
Agent A decision maker. The LLM-powered agent is a powerful framework for solving complex tasks by using an LLM as
its central computational engine.
Model Context Protocol (MCP) A standard for connecting AI assistants to the systems where data lives, including content repositories, business
tools, and development environments.
Agent2Agent (A2A) Protocol A standard to facilitate communication between independent AI agents.
Openwashing A term used to describe the act of presenting a model as open source when it is not using a permissive license.
Table 7: Terminology for LLMs and agents.
Key Terms Explanations
Earnings Conference Calls (ECCs) A call between a public company and key stakeholders to discuss the company’s financial results.
Monetary Policy Calls (MPCs) Countries’ central banks hold MPC to decide what monetary policy action to take.
Environmental, Social, Governance (ESG) This is shorthand for an investing principle that prioritizes environmental issues, social issues, and corporate
governance.
Financial Decision Making It encompasses evaluating options, making choices, and taking actions (trading) related to financial matters.
eXtensible Business Reporting Language (XBRL) XBRL is the global standard that powers digital reporting.
Common Domain Model (CDM) CDM is a standardized, machine-readable, and machine-executable data and process model for how financial
products are traded and managed across the transaction lifecycle.
Robo-Advisor A type of automated financial advisor that provides algorithm-driven management services without human
intervention.
Digital Regulatory Reporting (DRR) DRR is a cross-industry initiative to transform the reporting infrastructure.
Greenwashing Promotes false solutions to the climate crisis that distract from and delay concrete and credible action.
Table 8: Terminology for finance.