[Page 1]
Open FinLLM Leaderboard: Towards Financial AI Readiness
Shengyuan Colin Lin∗
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
USA
lins10@rpi.edu
Felix Tian†
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
USA
tianf2@rpi.edu
Keyi Wang‡
Columbia University
USA
kw2914@columbia.edu
Xingjian Zhao
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
USA
zhaox8@rpi.edu
Jimin Huang
FinAI
Singapore
jimin.huang@thefin.ai
Qianqian Xie
Yale University
New Haven, Connecticut, USA
qianqian.xie@yale.edu
Luca Borella
Linux Foundation
New York, USA
luca.borella@finos.org
Matt White
GM of AI, Linux Foundation;
Executive Director, PyTorch
Foundation; UC Berkeley
Berkeley, USA
Christina Dan Wang
New York University Shanghai
Shanghai, China
christina.wang@nyu.edu
Kairong Xiao
Business School, Columbia University
New York, NY, USA
kx2139@columbia.edu
Xiao-Yang Liu Yanglet§
Columbia University and Rensselaer
Polytechnic Institute
New York, NY, USA
XL2427@columbia.edu
Li Deng
University of Washington
Seattle, WA, USA
deng629@gmail.com
Figure 1: Overview of the open FinLLM leaderboard, from leaderboard, demos to financial AI readiness.
∗Shengyuan Colin Lin worked as a RA at Columbia University during Fall 2024.
†Felix Tian contributed equally to this project.
‡Keyi Wang contributed equally to this project. She worked as a RA at Columbia
University.
§Corresponding author
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
ABSTRACT
Financial large language models (FinLLMs) with multimodal capa-
bilities are envisioned to revolutionize applications across business,
finance, accounting, and auditing. However, real-world adoption
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ICAIF 24, Nov. 15, NY, USA
© 2024 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-x-xxxx-xxxx-x/YY/MM. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
arXiv:2501.10963v2  [cs.CE]  29 Apr 2025


[Page 2]
ICAIF 24, Nov. 15, NY, USA
Shengyuan Colin Lin, Felix Tian, Keyi Wang, Xingjian Zhao, Jimin Huang, Qianqian Xie, Luca Borella, Matt White, Christina Dan Wang, Kairong Xiao, Xiao-Yang Liu Yanglet,
and Li Deng
requires robust benchmarks of FinLLMs’ and FinAgents’ perfor-
mance. Maintaining an open leaderboard is crucial for encouraging
innovative adoption and improving model effectiveness. In collabo-
ration with Linux Foundation and Hugging Face, we create an open
FinLLM leaderboard, which serves as an open platform for assess-
ing and comparing AI models’ performance on a wide spectrum of
financial tasks. By demoncratizing access to advances of financial
knowledge and intelligence, a chatbot or agent may enhance the
analytical capabilities of the general public to a professional level
within a few months of usage. This open leaderboard welcomes
contributions from academia, open-source community, industry,
and stakeholders. In particular, we encourage contributions of new
datasets, tasks, and models for continual update. Through fostering
a collaborative and open ecosystem, we seek to promote financial
AI readiness.
KEYWORDS
FinLLM, leaderboard, FinGPT, search agent, financial AI readiness,
ACM Reference Format:
Shengyuan Colin Lin, Felix Tian, Keyi Wang, Xingjian Zhao, Jimin Huang,
Qianqian Xie, Luca Borella, Matt White, Christina Dan Wang, Kairong
Xiao, Xiao-Yang Liu Yanglet, and Li Deng. 2024. Open FinLLM Leaderboard:
Towards Financial AI Readiness. In International Workshop on Multimodal
Financial Foundation Models (MFFMs) at 5th ACM International Conference
on AI in Finance (MFFM at ICAIF ’24), November 14–17, 2024, Brooklyn, NY,
USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 26 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.
nnnnnnn
1 INTRODUCTION
Financial large language models (FinLLMs) and FinAgents with
multimodal capabilities are rapidly advancing, poised to revolu-
tionize a wide range of applications across business, finance, ac-
counting, auditing, etc. FinLLM-powered agents streamline XBRL
file analysis [10], automating financial filings and enhancing trans-
parency across financial processes. FinGPT Search Agents [ 33],
based on FinGPT [17, 18, 46], help decision-makers retrieve finan-
cial information with verified sources. FinLLMs show promise in
social media analysis, such as understanding online interactions
during the GameStop short squeeze event [16]. These models can
also improve credit scoring, fraud detection, and regulatory compli-
ance [23, 42], by improving risk assessments, fraud identification,
and legal document processing in response to evolving regulatory
demands [36, 37, 51]. More financial tasks can be found in [41].
Although FinLLMs and FinAgetns have great potentials, there are
several major challenges to be addressed. One of the most impact-
ful issues is “hallucination" [14], where models generate plausible
but inaccurate information. Unreliable performance is an obsta-
cle when it comes to financial decision-making as it would imply
serious risks. LLMs also struggle to meet the complex demands
of financial professionals who require high levels of precision, re-
liability, and advanced capabilities in quantitative reasoning and
contextual accuracy. Privacy-preserving of training data, testing
data, and model weights is another critical issue. Addressing these
limitations requires advancements in multimodal FinLLMs, which
are essential for financial tasks such as trading, risk management,
and regulatory compliance [7].
In order to continually develop and fine-tune open multimodal
LLMs, a well-accepted leaderboard with a standardized evaluation
framework and continuous maintenance is essential. However, ex-
isting benchmarks, such as FinBen [ 41] and FinanceBench [ 12],
are static and lack the momentum to continuously adapt to and
evaluate emerging FinLLMs and FinAgents, thereby limiting their
utility for real-world applications and innovations.
In this paper, we present an open platform, FinLLM leaderboard,
that evaluates and compares FinLLMs and FinAgents across a wide
spectrum of financial tasks. It is a collaborative project with Linux
Foundation and Hugging Face. This leaderboard provides a trans-
parent and standardized framework that ranks models based on
their (multimodal) performance in areas such as financial reporting,
sentiment analysis, and stock prediction. It also serves as an open
platform for the community to evaluate, interact with, and compare
FinLLMs and FinAgents in real-world scenarios. Beyond numeric
scores, we showcase the integration with the FinGPT Search Agent
[33], a promising use case of a personalized financial advisor. Users
can explore, interact with, and compare models through demos.
Additionally, we encourage contributions of models, datasets, and
tasks to keep the leaderboard dynamic and responsive to the evolv-
ing needs of the financial industry. The leaderboard is continuously
evolving, ensuring that it remains up-to-date with the latest Fin-
LLMs and agents and adapts to more profesional-level financial
tasks. We aim to foster an open collaborative ecosystem for long-
term maintenance by following the Model Openness Framework
[38] 1 and OpenMDW License2.
The educational documents of the open FinLLM leaderboard
is available on this website3, while the associated codes are avail-
able on Hugging Face4 and Github5, respectively. The open-source
FinGPT Search Agent [33] is available on Github6.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2
reviews related works. Section 3 provides an overview of the open
FinLLM leaderboard. Section 4 describes two demos, in particular,
an app demo and a web demo of model evaluations, as well as
several use scenarios. Section 5 discusses the hurdles to financial
AI readiness.
2 RELATED WORKS
2.1 Development of FinLLMs
The proprietary BloombergGPT [40] was trained on a mixture of
general data and financial data. It reported good performance on
tasks such as sentiment analysis, question answering, and report
summarization.
The open-source FinGPT [17, 18, 33, 46] aims to democratize ac-
cess to FinLLMs and agents by offering an automatic data curation
pipeline and releasing fine-tuned model weights. These FinLLMs
emphasize transparency and community-driven development, offer-
ing open alternatives to proprietary models. Multimodal FinLLMs
and agents, capable of integrating text, tables, and time-series data,
1https://isitopen.ai/
2https://openmdw.ai/
3https://finllm-leaderboard.readthedocs.io
4https://huggingface.co/spaces/finosfoundation/Open-Financial-LLM-Leaderboard
5https://github.com/finos-labs/Open-Financial-LLMs-Leaderboard
6https://github.com/Open-Finance-Lab/FinGPT-Search-Agent


[Page 3]
Open FinLLM Leaderboard: Towards Financial AI Readiness ICAIF 24, Nov. 15, NY, USA
have shown notable improvements in stock movement forecasting
and risk management tasks [43].
2.2 Benchmarking FinLLMs
Various benchmarks have been developed to evaluate FinLLMs
performance on financial tasks. One of the most comprehensive
benchmarks is FinBen [41]. The FinBen spans 24 tasks across 46
datasets, providing a robust framework for evaluating models like
GPT-4 and Gemini. Tasks within FinBen cover information ex-
traction, question answering, stock trading, and so on. Another
notable benchmark is FinanceBench [12] that focused on financial
question answering and released 150 questions. Moreover, compu-
tational benchmarks such as FinGPT-HPC [18] aimed to improve
the efficiency of pretraining and fine-tuning LLMs for financial
applications, emphasizing GPU memory optimization and training
scalability in high-performance computing environments. Although
tasks covering can be considerably comprehensive at the moment,
benchmarks like FinanceBench are static in nature and lack inter-
active capabilities. Therefore, less likely to be well accepted and
continuously contribute to the community.
Our open FinLLM leaderboard is not designed to compete with
these benchmarks. We are moving one step further to complement
them by offering an open platform for continuous contributions.
We encourage collaboration with the open source comminuties and
benchmark developers and integrate FinBen [41] and FinanceBench
[12], creating an evaluation ecosystem.
3 OPEN FINLLM LEADERBOARD
First, we provide an overview of the open FinLLM leaderboard.
Then, we describe the financial tasks and testing pipeline.
3.1 Overview
Our work extends beyond setting up a leaderboard demo to provide
benchmark results. In Fig. 1 shows three stages of this leaderboard.
We believe that the leaderboard serves as a crucial step towards
financial AI readiness.
The open FinLLM leaderboard is collecting research lab-contributed
financial evaluation tasks tested with pretrained and finetuned mod-
els, such as ChatGPT, LLaMA3, and Gemini.
We have a demo hosted on HuggingFace and a FinGPT Search
Agent application [33], which serves as an interactive layer where
users can access the leaderboard, view model performances, and
directly compare results in a side-by-side view.
We aim to identify financial AI readiness by delivering valuable
insights for model deployment in real-world applications. It may
help public users to identify models that outcompete others in
certain financial tasks, giving a reliable standard for users choosing
appropriate FinLLMs to address their specific needs. As a result, we
can have a robust, AI-ready framework that empowers financial
professionals with the right tools to enhance decision-making and
operational efficiency.
3.2 Financial Tasks with Multimodal Data
We compare FinLLMs across multiple task categories including in-
formation extraction (IE), textual analysis (TA), question answering
(QA), text generation (TG), risk management (RM), forecasting (FO)
and Decision-Making (DM). It provides a comprehensive evaluation
on tasks with multimodal data, such as text, tables, numerical data,
and structured formats like XBRL. A screenshot of the scores is
shown in Fig. 2.
The open FinLLM leaderboard enables users to view and compare
top-performing models. As shown in Fig. 3, users have the flexibility
to filter and reorder the displayed information by selecting specific
categories and tasks. The current42 financial datasets are organized
into seven categories, as given in Table 1.
• Information extraction (IE): Involves transforming unstruc-
tured financial data into structured formats, such as extracting
entities or identifying relationships in financial agreements. It is
essential for automating information retrieval of financial docu-
ments, such as SEC 10K filings.
• Textual analysis(TA): Involves evaluating how well LLMs quan-
tify sentiment, classify financial news, or identify argumentative
structures, which are crucial for market sentiment analysis.
• Question answering (QA): Involves evaluating models on their
ability to answer complex financial queries, particularly involving
numerical reasoning or document comprehension.
• Text generation (TG): Involves summarization tasks focus on
generating coherent, concise representations of financial docu-
ments. It is important for creating reports or summaries from
lengthy financial articles.
• Risk Management (RM): Involves predicting credit risk or de-
tecting fraudulent behavior, which is critical in assessing the
likelihood of default or fraud.
• Forecasting (FO): Involves tasks such as stock movement predic-
tion which challenge models to anticipate market trends based
on financial data. Effective forecasting has a direct impact on
financial decision-making.
• Decision-Making (DM): Involves tasks that pertain to trading
decisions or M&A deal completeness and the ability to simulate
and support decision-making in financial environments.
Users can easily explore these categories and customize the
displayed results based on their interests, ensuring relevant and
practical insights for financial analysis, as shown in Fig. 3.
3.3 Testing Pipeline
Fig. 4 is an overview of our testing pipeline. We apply a zero-shot
evaluation setting in testing expert-validated datasets, evaluating
models in multimodal settings across various financial tasks. Models
are compared fairly based on their ability to handle unseen tasks
in finance. The evaluation code is available On Github 7.
The following popular models were evaluated in the current
pipeline: GPT-4 (standard version) [1], LLaMA 3.1 (both 8B and 70B
versions) [8], Gemini [2], Qwen2 (72B and 7B-Instruct versions)
[45], Xuanyuan-70B [50].
Testing pipeline:
• Model downloading: Models are either downloaded from Hug-
gingface or accessed via APIs.
• Preprocessing and tokenization: Financial documents are tok-
enized to meet each model’s format and token limit requirements.
7https://github.com/finos-labs/Open-Financial-LLMs-Leaderboard


[Page 4]
ICAIF 24, Nov. 15, NY, USA
Shengyuan Colin Lin, Felix Tian, Keyi Wang, Xingjian Zhao, Jimin Huang, Qianqian Xie, Luca Borella, Matt White, Christina Dan Wang, Kairong Xiao, Xiao-Yang Liu Yanglet,
and Li Deng
Figure 2: A screenshot of the open FinLLM leaderborad. The top 11 models are ranked across 7 financial tasks.
Table 1: Financial tasks in the open FinLLM leaderboard.
Category Tasks
Information Extraction (IE) Named Entity Recognition (NER), Relation Extraction, Causal Classification.
Textual Analysis (TA) Sentiment Analysis, Hawkish-Dovish Classification, Argument Unit Classification.
Question Answering (QA) Answering financial questions from datasets like FinQA and TATQA.
Text Generation (TG) Summarization of financial texts (e.g., reports, filings).
Risk Management (RM) Credit Scoring, Fraud Detection, evaluating financial risks.
Forecasting (FO) Stock Movement Prediction based on financial news and social media.
Decision-Making (DM) Simulating decision-making tasks, e.g., M&A transactions, trading tasks.
Figure 3: Example of task selection, allowing users to browse
tasks under different financial categories.
• Zero-shot evaluation: Models are evaluated without prior fine-
tuning on the task-specific datasets, focusing on their generaliza-
tion ability in financial contexts.
• Expert-validated datasets: The datasets are selected and val-
idated by financial professionals, ensuring their relevance to
real-world financial applications.
• Metric calculation and normalization : Each model’s perfor-
mance is measured across different metrics based on task require-
ments (Accuracy, F1 Score, ROUGE, BERTScore, MCC, etc.). For
fair comparison, all scores are normalized into the range [0, 100]
using min-max scaling:
𝑆 = 𝑆 − min
max − min × 100, (1)
where 𝑆 is the raw score, and [min, max] is the original range.
For example, a score of 0 in [−3, 3] normalizes to 50, while 0.5 in
[0, 1] also normalizes to 50.
• Ranking: After normalization, models are ranked based on their
scores across different tasks, providing an aggregate performance
metric for comparison.
Evaluation metrics . The models’ performance is measured
using the following metrics:
• Accuracy: Used in the credit scoring and Hawkish-Dovish clas-
sification tasks.
• F1 score: Used in the sentiment analysis, named entity recogni-
tion (NER), and relation extraction tasks.
• ROUGE score : Used in the summarization tasks, measuring
the quality of generated text by comparing it with reference
summaries.
• BERTScore: Measures the similarity between the generated and
reference summaries at a more granular, contextual level.
• Matthews correlation coefficient (MCC): Used in the binary
classification tasks, such as fraud detection and credit scoring.
3.4 Structure
Fig. 6 shows our hierarchical structure leaderboard system:
• Main Leaderboard: Aggregates performance across all applica-
tion scenarios
• Application-Specific Leaderboards: Group tasks by real-world
use cases


[Page 5]
Open FinLLM Leaderboard: Towards Financial AI Readiness ICAIF 24, Nov. 15, NY, USA
Figure 4: Testing pipeline currently used in the FinLLM leaderboard.
Figure 5: Demo of FinGPT Search Agent [ 33]: users could
check information sources.
Each child leaderboard represents a core business application:
• Search Agent: Enterprise search and information retrieval
• AI Tutor: Educational assistance and content generation
• Compliance: Regulatory monitoring and policy adherence
• Auditing: Financial and operational verification
This structure clearly maps child leaderboard to business func-
tions, enabling the industries to find the scenarios they need and
access to relevant benchmarks easily.
4 DEMOS AND USE SCENARIOS
We present two types of demos for users to explore, utilize, and
compare FinLLM models in various use scenarios.
Figure 6: Global performance overview showing weighted
average scores across all scenarios
4.1 App Demo: Search Agent
The FinGPT Search Agent [33] demonstrates advanced capabilities
in financial data retrieval and analysis by leveraging Retrieval-
Augmented Generation (RAG). RAG integrates real-time informa-
tion retrieval into the generative process, enabling the model to
incorporate relevant, up-to-date data from sources such as Yahoo
Finance, Bloomberg, or local documents like PDFs and Excel sheets
[52]. Fig. 5 illustrates the FinGPT Search Agent’s capability of per-
forming RAG and online search, ensuring that its responses are
enriched with up-to-date and most relevant financial information.
Fig. 7 shows a side-by-side comparison mode of two selected
models from the open FinLLM leaderboard. Both models utilize the
same set of verifiable sources, enabling users to directly compare
their results. This integration not only allows for a comparative anal-
ysis using performance metrics from the open FinLLM leaderboard
but also facilitates source verification, ensuring that the generated
responses are grounded in reliable, up-to-date information. The
demo provides a hands-on experience, allowing users to assess the
strengths and weaknesses of different models in real-world financial
contexts.
Side-by-side comparison mode . Fig. 7 showcases FinGPT
search agent’s side-by-side comparison feature [ 33], displaying
responses from Model 1 and Model 2 to the prompt, "How is the
world of finance going today?". This format enables users to quali-
tatively assess differences in response style, depth, and relevance,


[Page 6]
ICAIF 24, Nov. 15, NY, USA
Shengyuan Colin Lin, Felix Tian, Keyi Wang, Xingjian Zhao, Jimin Huang, Qianqian Xie, Luca Borella, Matt White, Christina Dan Wang, Kairong Xiao, Xiao-Yang Liu Yanglet,
and Li Deng
providing insights beyond traditional evaluation scores. While stan-
dard metrics like accuracy offer limited insights, our open-box
evaluation allows users to explore model outputs directly. By pre-
senting responses side-by-side, FinGPT’s leaderboard goes “beyond
the scores, ” helping users evaluate practical aspects such as clar-
ity, factual accuracy, and relevance in real-world contexts. This
approach opens the black box of model evaluation, aligning metrics
with real-world utility.
Fig. 10 demonstrates the unique workflow of the Open Finan-
cial LLM Leaderboard. Beyond presenting task-specific scores, it
includes a powerful side-by-side comparison feature. This function-
ality allows users to:
• Select two models to compare.
• Provide a single test input to both models.
• Observe and evaluate the outputs generated by the models
side-by-side.
4.2 Web Demo
The open FinLLM leaderboard demo, hosted on Huggingface with
support from the Linux Foundation, provides users an intuitive way
to interact with a variety of financial tasks and an easy-to-navigate
environment for evaluating financial language models. Users can se-
lect tasks from multiple categories, such as Information Extraction,
Risk Management, and Forecasting, and assess the performance of
various models across these tasks. Fig. 3 provides a screenshot of
the task selection interface.
Once a task is selected, users can view a comprehensive table
summarizing model performance using relevant metrics. This setup
enables direct comparisons across different models and tasks, help-
ing users identify the most suitable models for their specific needs.
Fig. 2 illustrates an example of the result table, which presents the
performance metrics for easy comparison and reference.
4.3 Zero-Knowledge Proof
In the open FinLLM leaderboard, we apply the Zero-Knowledge
Proof (ZKP) technology. This feature aims to protect the privacy of
the dataset and prevent fraudulent behaviors such as leaderboard
hacking. With ZKP, we envision a system that can verify model
performance without exposing sensitive input data, ensuring both
integrity and security of the evaluation process.
Our Zero-Knowledge Proof (ZKP) implementation ensures eval-
uation integrity while protecting sensitive data:
• Privacy-Preserving Verification: Models can prove their per-
formance without exposing training data
• Anti-Gaming Protection: Prevents leaderboard manipulation
through cryptographic verification.
• Data Confidentiality: Financial institutions can contribute pro-
prietary datasets without disclosure
• Transparent Auditing: All evaluations are cryptographically
verifiable while maintaining privacy
4.4 Use Scenarios
The open FinLLM leaderboard would potentially benefit the fol-
lowing financial applications. Here, we provide exploration and
analysis of real-world use scenarios, inspired by [48].
4.4.1 Refining Questions for Legal Consultations. FinLLMs can help
users refine their inquiries before meeting with legal counsel, lead-
ing to significant time and cost savings. By generating focused
and precise questions in advance, clients reduce consultation time,
thereby enhancing the efficiency and cost-effectiveness of legal
interactions. On the service provider side, lawyers benefit from
streamlined case preparation, allowing for the rapid identification
of pertinent cases and regulations, which ultimately enhances pro-
ductivity. This approach can be generalized to other domains, in-
cluding medical consultations, exam preparation, and the analysis
of records. An illustrative example of this application is provided
in Appendix Fig. 15.
4.4.2 General Public vs. LLM-Assisted Financial Document Analy-
sis. FinLLMs empower the general public to comprehend complex
financial documents, such as earnings reports or regulatory fil-
ings, with a level of proficiency comparable to that of financial
professionals. By simplifying, summarizing, and contextualizing
information, these models enable users to make more informed
decisions. Whether analyzing investment opportunities or assess-
ing corporate financial health, FinLLMs help demystify intricate
financial data, thereby bridging the knowledge gap between pro-
fessionals and non-specialists. An illustrative example is provided
in appendix Fig. 18
4.4.3 Simplifying Financial Analysis for Everyday Users. Platforms
such as Yahoo Finance, Bloomberg, The Wall Street Journal, Busi-
ness Insider, MarketWatch, and CNBC frequently present vast and
often overwhelming amounts of financial information. FinLLMs
assist users by extracting key data points and insights, effectively
addressing questions such as, ’What are the most critical elements
on this page to consider if I am evaluating potential investments?’
This functionality not only saves users time but also enhances their
comprehension of complex financial content, thereby empowering
more informed investment decisions. An illustrative example of
this application is provided in Appendix Fig. 18.
5 TOW ARDS FINANCIAL AI READINESS
Our goal would be to build an open community that pushes fi-
nancial AI to be ready for real-world applications and to build a
gateway between academia and industry. By translating complex
research achievements into accessible and actionable insights, we
foster the growth of the Agentic AI Ecosystem. The Open FinLLM
Leaderboard is similar to established industry standards such as
MCP and MOF. We set the benchmark for financial AI readiness,
ensuring that innovations in financial language models are both
practical and impactful. In this section, we discuss critical aspects
and how this leaderboard and the surrounding community will
contribute to FinLLweMs’ readiness.
5.1 Evaluating Financial Performance
Financial AI readiness requires FinLLM models that not only per-
form technically well but also integrate with existing workflows,
provide useful insights, and comply with industry regulations. The
open FinLLM leaderboard assesses how models perform on finan-
cial tasks like risk management, sentiment analysis, and regulatory


[Page 7]
Open FinLLM Leaderboard: Towards Financial AI Readiness ICAIF 24, Nov. 15, NY, USA
Figure 7: The side-by-side comparison mode of FinGPT Search Agent [ 33]. Both Model #1 and Model #2 respond to the prompt
"How is the world of finance going today?".
compliance. These evaluations help developers and practitioners
select models for deployment and identify aspects to be improved.
By including a range of tasks that reflect real financial challenges,
this leaderboard ensures models are capable of handling financial
analytical problems, not just standard text tasks. This supports
the potential integration of models into financial decision-making
processes, such as investment analysis, compliance checks, and
automated reporting.
5.2 Revealing Model Limitations:
Hallucinations and Interpretability
Accuracy and reliability are crucial in terms of financial applications.
However, A major challenge existed is the risk of "hallucinations, "
where models produce incorrect or misleading information. Affect-
ing by AI generated misinformation, people tend to make flawed
investment decisions or misunderstandings of regulations [14].
To identify whether AI is hallucinating, we include tests focused
on interpretability and reliability specifically for financial services.
After we evaluate models on tasks where precision is critical, we can
help financial institutions identify and reduce risks. In the future,
stakeholders and financial institutions can deploy models fitting
well on their demands by assessing between model evaluation
results.
5.3 Ethical Considerations and Transparency
High ethical standards is also essential for AI to be a part of financial
decision-making. In this case, the open FinLLM leaderboard encour-
ages transparency, fairness, and ethical compliance in deploying
financial AI by providing a specialized evaluation framework in
financial sector [34].
Our zero-shot evaluation method tests models on new tasks,
simulating the real-world financial scenarios where models usually
given tasks without observing from examples. This approach can
reveal a model’s actual abilities and limitations, therefore building
trust among financial institutions, regulators, and the public. The
leaderboard offers transparent evaluations and can helps organiza-
tions make informed decisions and meeting regulatory and ethical
standards when using AI.


[Page 8]
ICAIF 24, Nov. 15, NY, USA
Shengyuan Colin Lin, Felix Tian, Keyi Wang, Xingjian Zhao, Jimin Huang, Qianqian Xie, Luca Borella, Matt White, Christina Dan Wang, Kairong Xiao, Xiao-Yang Liu Yanglet,
and Li Deng
5.4 Future Research
Multimodal capabilities [49]: For financial AI readiness, models
need to handle different types of data, such as text, figures, tables,
time-series data, and alternative data. The leaderboard will keep
evolving to meet new challenges, through community involvement
and continuous updates.
GPU optimization for inference : To provide personalized
financial advices [33] (running locally on personal devices), it is
important to reduce GPU memory consumption and response time.
LoRA fine-tuning is practically useful for adapting a general pur-
pose model to a personalized version, such as the ongoing project
FinLoRA [35], while uantization into 8 bit or 4 bits is an effective
technique that greatly reduce GPU memory consumption [18].
Zero-Knowledge Proofs (ZKPs): The privacy concern is crit-
ical in business and finance, while the inference process of our
leaderboard is no exception. One the one hand, close-source mod-
els require the protection of model weights and training datasets
(possible other artifacts). ZKPs provide a verifiable auditing process
for newly released model weights. On the other hand, we expect
to include evaluation results on proprietary testing datasets. ZKPs
allow authors to publish such results along with the generated
proof-file, without revealing information of the testing dataset.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Shengyuan Colin Lin, Keyi Wang, and Xiao-Yang Liu Yanglet ac-
knowledge the support from Columbia’s SIRS and STAR Program,
The Tang Family Fund for Research Innovations in FinTech, Engi-
neering, and Business Operations. Shengyuan Colin Lin, Felix Tian,
Xingjian Zhao, and Xiao-Yang Liu Yanglet acknowledge the sup-
port from NSF IUCRC CRAFT center research grant (CRAFT Grant
22017) for this research. The opinions expressed in this publication
do not necessarily represent the views of NSF IUCRC CRAFT.
REFERENCES
[1] Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Floren-
cia Leoni Aleman, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal
Anadkat, et al. 2023. Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774
(2023).
[2] Rohan Anil, Sebastian Borgeaud, Yonghui Wu, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jiahui Yu,
Radu Soricut, Johan Schalkwyk, Andrew M Dai, Anja Hauth, Katie Millican, et al.
2023. Gemini: A family of highly capable multimodal models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2312.11805 1 (2023).
[3] Mattia Atzeni, Amna Dridi, and Diego Reforgiato Recupero. 2017. Fine-Grained
Sentiment Analysis on Financial Microblogs and News Headlines. In Semantic
Web Challenges, Mauro Dragoni, Monika Solanki, and Eva Blomqvist (Eds.).
Springer International Publishing, Cham, 124–128.
[4] Chung-Chi Chen, Yu-Min Tseng, Juyeon Kang, Anaïs Lhuissier, Min-Yuh Day,
Teng-Tsai Tu, and Hsin-Hsi Chen. 2023. Multi-lingual ESG issue identification. In
Proceedings of the Fifth Workshop on Financial Technology and Natural Language
Processing and the Second Multimodal AI for Financial Forecasting . 111–115.
[5] Zhiyu Chen, Wenhu Chen, Charese Smiley, Sameena Shah, Iana Borova, Dylan
Langdon, Reema Moussa, Matt Beane, Ting-Hao Huang, Bryan Routledge, et al.
2021. Finqa: A dataset of numerical reasoning over financial data. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2109.00122 (2021).
[6] Zhiyu Chen, Shiyang Li, Charese Smiley, Zhiqiang Ma, Sameena Shah, and
William Yang Wang. 2022. Convfinqa: Exploring the chain of numerical reasoning
in conversational finance question answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03849
(2022).
[7] Han Ding, Yinheng Li, Junhao Wang, and Hang Chen. 2024. Large Language
Model Agent in Financial Trading: A Survey. arXiv 2408.06361 (2024).
[8] Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad
Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela Fan,
et al. 2024. The llama 3 herd of models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783 (2024).
[9] Duanyu Feng, Yongfu Dai, Jimin Huang, Yifang Zhang, Qianqian Xie, Weiguang
Han, Zhengyu Chen, Alejandro Lopez-Lira, and Hao Wang. 2023. Empowering
many, biasing a few: Generalist credit scoring through large language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.00566 (2023).
[10] Shijie Han, Haoqiang Kang, Bo Jin, Xiao-Yang Liu, and Steve Yang. 2024. XBRL-
Agent: Leveraging Large Language Models for Financial Report Analysis. ACM
International Conference on AI in Finance (2024).
[11] Hans Hofmann. 1994. Statlog (German credit data). UCI Machine Learning
Repository 10 (1994), C5NC77.
[12] Pranab Islam, Anand Kannappan, Douwe Kiela, Rebecca Qian, Nino Scherrer, and
Bertie Vidgen. 2023. FinanceBench: A New Benchmark for Financial Question
Answering. arXiv 2311.11944 (2023).
[13] Rasmus Jørgensen, Oliver Brandt, Mareike Hartmann, Xiang Dai, Christian Igel,
and Desmond Elliott. 2023. MultiFin: A Dataset for Multilingual Financial NLP.
In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EACL 2023 , Andreas
Vlachos and Isabelle Augenstein (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics,
Dubrovnik, Croatia, 894–909. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-eacl.66
[14] Haoqiang Kang and Xiao-Yang Liu. 2023. Deficiency of large language models
in finance: An empirical examination of hallucination. In I Can’t Believe It’s Not
Better Workshop: Failure Modes in the Age of Foundation Models (NeurIPS) .
[15] Matthew Lamm, Arun Tejasvi Chaganty, Christopher D Manning, Dan Jurafsky,
and Percy Liang. 2018. Textual analogy parsing: What’s shared and what’s
compared among analogous facts. arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.02700 (2018).
[16] Shengyuan Lin, Keyi Wang, and Xiao-Yang Liu. 2024. Analyzing Cascading
Outbreak of GameStop Event: A Practical Approach Using Network Analysis and
Large Language Models. ACM International Conference on AI in Finance (2024).
[17] Xiao-Yang Liu, Guoxuan Wang, Hongyang Yang, and Daochen Zha. 2023. Data-
centric FinGPT: Democratizing Internet-scale data for financial large language
models. Workshop on Instruction Tuning and Instruction Following, NeurIPS(2023).
[18] Xiao-Yang Liu, Jie Zhang, Guoxuan Wang, Weiqing Tong, and Anwar Walid. 2024.
FinGPT-HPC: Efficient Pretraining and Finetuning Large Language Models for
Financial Applications with High-Performance Computing. arXiv 2402.13533
(2024).
[19] Macedo Maia, Siegfried Handschuh, André Freitas, Brian Davis, Ross McDer-
mott, Manel Zarrouk, and Alexandra Balahur. 2018. WWW’18 Open Challenge:
Financial Opinion Mining and Question Answering. In Companion Proceedings
of the The Web Conference 2018 (Lyon, France) (WWW ’18). International World
Wide Web Conferences Steering Committee, Republic and Canton of Geneva,
CHE, 1941–1942. https://doi.org/10.1145/3184558.3192301
[20] Pekka Malo, Ankur Sinha, Pekka Korhonen, Jyrki Wallenius, and Pyry Takala.
2014. Good debt or bad debt: Detecting semantic orientations in economic texts.
Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology 65, 4 (2014),
782–796.
[21] Dominique Mariko, Hanna Abi Akl, Estelle Labidurie, Stephane Durfort, Hugues
De Mazancourt, and Mahmoud El-Haj. 2020. Financial document causality detec-
tion shared task (fincausal 2020). arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.02505 (2020).
[22] Rajdeep Mukherjee, Abhinav Bohra, Akash Banerjee, Soumya Sharma, Manjunath
Hegde, Afreen Shaikh, Shivani Shrivastava, Koustuv Dasgupta, Niloy Ganguly,
Saptarshi Ghosh, et al. 2022. Ectsum: A new benchmark dataset for bullet point
summarization of long earnings call transcripts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.12467
(2022).
[23] Yuqi Nie, Yaxuan Kong, Xiaowen Dong, John M. Mulvey, H. Vincent Poor, Qing-
song Wen, and Stefan Zohren. 2024. A Survey of Large Language Models for
Financial Applications: Progress, Prospects and Challenges. arXiv 2406.11903
(2024).
[24] Ross Quinlan. 1987. Statlog (Australian credit approval). UCI Machine Learning
Repository 10 (1987), C59012.
[25] Julio Cesar Salinas Alvarado, Karin Verspoor, and Timothy Baldwin. 2015. Domain
Adaption of Named Entity Recognition to Support Credit Risk Assessment. In
Proceedings of the Australasian Language Technology Association Workshop 2015 ,
Ben Hachey and Kellie Webster (Eds.). Parramatta, Australia, 84–90. https:
//aclanthology.org/U15-1010/
[26] Agam Shah, Abhinav Gullapalli, Ruchit Vithani, Michael Galarnyk, and Sudheer
Chava. 2023. FiNER-ORD: Financial Named Entity Recognition Open Research
Dataset. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.11157 (2023).
[27] Agam Shah, Suvan Paturi, and Sudheer Chava. 2023. Trillion Dollar Words:
A New Financial Dataset, Task & Market Analysis. In Proceedings of the 61st
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
Papers). Association for Computational Linguistics, Toronto, Canada, 6664–6679.
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.368
[28] Soumya Sharma, Subhendu Khatuya, Manjunath Hegde, Afreen Shaikh, Koustuv
Dasgupta, Pawan Goyal, and Niloy Ganguly. 2023. Financial Numeric Extreme
Labelling: A dataset and benchmarking. In Findings of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics: ACL 2023, Anna Rogers, Jordan Boyd-Graber, and Naoaki
Okazaki (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, Toronto, Canada,
3550–3561. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-acl.219
[29] Soumya Sharma, Tapas Nayak, Arusarka Bose, Ajay Kumar Meena, Niloy Ganguly
Koustuv Dasgupta, and Pawan Goyal. 2022. FinRED: A Dataset for Relation


[Page 9]
Open FinLLM Leaderboard: Towards Financial AI Readiness ICAIF 24, Nov. 15, NY, USA
Extraction in Financial Domain. In Proceedings of The 2nd Workshop on Financial
Technology on the Web (FinWeb).
[30] Ankur Sinha and Tanmay Khandait. 2021. Impact of News on the Commodity
Market: Dataset and Results. In Advances in Information and Communication ,
Kohei Arai (Ed.). Springer International Publishing, Cham, 589–601.
[31] Yejun Soun, Jaemin Yoo, Minyong Cho, Jihyeong Jeon, and U Kang. 2022. Accurate
Stock Movement Prediction with Self-supervised Learning from Sparse Noisy
Tweets. In 2022 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big Data) . 1691–1700.
https://doi.org/10.1109/BigData55660.2022.10020720
[32] Eugene Sy, Tzu-Cheng Peng, Shih-Hsuan Huang, Heng-Yu Lin, and Yung-Chun
Chang. 2023. Fine-grained argument understanding with bert ensemble tech-
niques: A deep dive into financial sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of the 35th
Conference on Computational Linguistics and Speech Processing (ROCLING 2023) .
242–249.
[33] Felix Tian, Ajay Byadgi, Daniel Kim, Daochen Zha, Kairong Xiao, and Xiao-Yang
Liu. 2024. Customized FinGPT Search Agents Using Foundation Models. ACM
International Conference on AI in Finance (2024).
[34] Ngozi Samuel Uzougbo, Chinonso Gladys Ikegwu, and Adefolake Olachi Adewusi.
2024. Legal accountability and ethical considerations of AI in financial services.
GSC Advanced Research and Reviews 19, 02 (2024), 130–142.
[35] Dannong Wang, Daniel Kim, Bo Jin, Xingjian Zhao, Tianfan Fu, Steve Yang, and
Xiao-Yang Liu. 2024. FinLoRA: Finetuning Quantized Financial Large Language
Models Using Low-Rank Adaptation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.11378 (2024).
[36] Keyi Wang, Sarah Huang, Charlie Shen, Kaiwen He, Felix Tian, Jaisal Patel,
Christina Dan Wang, Kairong Xiao, and Xiao-Yang Liu. 2024. Professional Readi-
ness of LLMs in Financial Regulations?. In International Workshop on Multimodal
Financial Foundation Models, ACM ICAIF .
[37] Keyi Wang, Jaisal Patel, Charlie Shen, Daniel Kim, Andy Zhu, Alex Lin, Luca
Borella, Cailean Osborne, Matt White, Steve Yang, et al . 2024. A Report on
Financial Regulations Challenge at COLING 2025. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.11159
(2024).
[38] Matt White, Ibrahim Haddad, Cailean Osborne, Xiao-Yang Liu Yanglet, Ahmed
Abdelmonsef, and Sachin Varghese. 2024. The model openness framework:
Promoting completeness and openness for reproducibility, transparency and
usability in Artificial Intelligence. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.13784 (2024).
[39] Huizhe Wu, Wei Zhang, Weiwei Shen, and Jun Wang. 2018. Hybrid Deep Se-
quential Modeling for Social Text-Driven Stock Prediction. In Proceedings of the
27th ACM International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management
(Torino, Italy) (CIKM ’18). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY,
USA, 1627–1630. https://doi.org/10.1145/3269206.3269290
[40] Shijie Wu, Ozan Irsoy, Steven Lu, Vadim Dabravolski, Mark Dredze, Sebastian
Gehrmann, Prabhanjan Kambadur, David Rosenberg, and Gideon Mann. 2023.
BloombergGPT: A Large Language Model for Finance. arXiv 2303.17564 (2023).
[41] Qianqian Xie, Weiguang Han, Zhengyu Chen, Ruoyu Xiang, Xiao Zhang, Yueru
He, Mengxi Xiao, Dong Li, Yongfu Dai, Duanyu Feng, Yijing Xu, Haoqiang
Kang, Ziyan Kuang, Chenhan Yuan, Kailai Yang, Zheheng Luo, Tianlin Zhang,
Zhiwei Liu, Guojun Xiong, Zhiyang Deng, Yuechen Jiang, Zhiyuan Yao, Haohang
Li, Yangyang Yu, Gang Hu, Jiajia Huang, Xiao-Yang Liu, Alejandro Lopez-Lira,
Benyou Wang, Yanzhao Lai, Hao Wang, Min Peng, Sophia Ananiadou, and Jimin
Huang. 2024. FinBen: A Holistic Financial Benchmark for Large Language Models.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), Special Track on
Datasets and Benchmarks (2024).
[42] Qianqian Xie, Weiguang Han, Xiao Zhang, Yanzhao Lai, Min Peng, Alejandro
Lopez-Lira, and Jimin Huang. 2023. PIXIU: A Large Language Model, Instruction
Data and Evaluation Benchmark for Finance. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems (NeurIPS), Special Track on Datasets and Benchmarks (2023).
[43] Qianqian Xie, Dong Li, Mengxi Xiao, Zihao Jiang, Ruoyu Xiang, Xiao Zhang,
Zhengyu Chen, Yueru He, Weiguang Han, Yuzhe Yang, Shunian Chen, Yifei
Zhang, Lihang Shen, Daniel Kim, Zhiwei Liu, Zheheng Luo, Yangyang Yu, Yu-
peng Cao, Zhiyang Deng, Zhiyuan Yao, Haohang Li, Duanyu Feng, Yongfu Dai,
VijayaSai Somasundaram, Peng Lu, Yilun Zhao, Yitao Long, Guojun Xiong, Kaleb
Smith, Honghai Yu, Yanzhao Lai, Min Peng, Jianyun Nie, Jordan W. Suchow,
Xiao-Yang Liu, Benyou Wang, Alejandro Lopez-Lira, Jimin Huang, and Sophia
Ananiadou. 2024. Open-FinLLMs: Open Multimodal Large Language Models for
Financial Applications. arXiv 2408.11878 (2024).
[44] Yumo Xu and Shay B. Cohen. 2018. Stock Movement Prediction from Tweets and
Historical Prices. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , Iryna Gurevych and Yusuke
Miyao (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, Melbourne, Australia,
1970–1979. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P18-1183
[45] An Yang, Baosong Yang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Zhou, Cheng-
peng Li, Chengyuan Li, Dayiheng Liu, Fei Huang, et al. 2024. Qwen2 technical
report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.10671 (2024).
[46] Hongyang Yang, Xiao-Yang Liu, and Christina Dan Wang. 2023. FinGPT: Open-
Source Financial Large Language Models. Symposium on FinLLM, IJCAI (2023).
[47] Linyi Yang, Eoin M Kenny, Tin Lok James Ng, Yi Yang, Barry Smyth, and Ruihai
Dong. 2020. Generating plausible counterfactual explanations for deep trans-
formers in financial text classification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.12512 (2020).
[48] Zhengyuan Yang, Linjie Li, Kevin Lin, Jianfeng Wang, Chung-Ching Lin, Zicheng
Liu, and Lijuan Wang. 2023. The Dawn of LMMs: Preliminary Explorations with
GPT-4V(ision). arXiv:2309.17421 [cs.CV] https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.17421
[49] Xiao-Yang Liu Yanglet and Li Deng. 2024. Multimodal Financial Foundation
Models (MFFMs): Progress, Prospects, and Challenges. International Workshop
on Multimodal Financial Foundation Models (MFFMs) at 5th ACM International
Conference on AI in Finance (MFFM at ICAIF ’24), (2024).
[50] Xuanyu Zhang and Qing Yang. 2023. Xuanyuan 2.0: A large chinese financial chat
model with hundreds of billions parameters. In ACM International Conference on
Information and Knowledge Management . 4435–4439.
[51] Huaqin Zhao, Zhengliang Liu, Zihao Wu, Yiwei Li, Tianze Yang, Peng Shu,
Shaochen Xu, Haixing Dai, Lin Zhao, Gengchen Mai, Ninghao Liu, and Tianming
Liu. 2024. Revolutionizing Finance with LLMs: An Overview of Applications and
Insights. arXiv 2401.11641 (2024).
[52] Penghao Zhao, Hailin Zhang, Qinhan Yu, Zhengren Wang, Yunteng Geng,
Fangcheng Fu, Ling Yang, Wentao Zhang, Jie Jiang, and Bin Cui. 2024. Retrieval-
augmented generation for ai-generated content: A survey. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2402.19473 (2024).
[53] Fengbin Zhu, Wenqiang Lei, Youcheng Huang, Chao Wang, Shuo Zhang,
Jiancheng Lv, Fuli Feng, and Tat-Seng Chua. 2021. TAT-QA: A question an-
swering benchmark on a hybrid of tabular and textual content in finance. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2105.07624 (2021).


[Page 10]
ICAIF 24, Nov. 15, NY, USA
Shengyuan Colin Lin, Felix Tian, Keyi Wang, Xingjian Zhao, Jimin Huang, Qianqian Xie, Luca Borella, Matt White, Christina Dan Wang, Kairong Xiao, Xiao-Yang Liu Yanglet,
and Li Deng
Table 2: Overview of financial tasks, evaluation metrics, and dataset sizes.
Category Dataset Task Evaluation Metric Test
Size
IE NER [25] Named Entity Recognition Entity F1 980
IE FiNER-ORD [26] Named Entity Recognition Entity F1 1080
IE FinRED [29] Relation Extraction F1, Entity F1 1068
IE SC [21] Causal Classification F1, Entity F1 864
IE CD [21] Causal Detection F1, Entity F1 226
IE FNXL [28] Numeric Labeling F1, EM Accuracy 318
IE FSRL [15] Textual Analogy Parsing F1, EM Accuracy 97
Total IE 4633
TA FPB [20] Sentiment Analysis F1, Accuracy 970
TA FiQA-SA [19] Sentiment Analysis F1 1173
TA TSA [3] Sentiment Analysis F1, Accuracy 561
TA Headlines [30] News Headline Classification Avg F1 11412
TA FOMC [27] Hawkish-Dovish Classification F1, Accuracy 496
TA FinArg-ACC [32] Argument Unit Classification F1, Accuracy 969
TA FinArg-ARC [32] Argument Relation Classification F1, Accuracy 690
TA MultiFin [13] Multi-Class Classification F1, Accuracy 546
TA MA [47] Deal Completeness Classification F1, Accuracy 500
TA MLESG [4] ESG Issue Identification F1, Accuracy 300
Total TA 17617
QA FinQA [5] Question Answering EM Accuracy 1147
QA TATQA [53] Question Answering F1, EM Accuracy 1670
QA Regulations [41] Long-Form QA ROUGE, BERTScore 200
QA ConvFinQA [6] Multi-Turn QA EM Accuracy 1490
Total QA 4507
TG ECTSum [22] Text Summarization ROUGE, BERTScore, BARTScore 495
TG EDTSum [41] Text Summarization ROUGE, BERTScore, BARTScore 2000
Total TG 2495
FO BigData22 [31] Stock Movement Prediction Accuracy, MCC 1470
FO ACL18 [44] Stock Movement Prediction Accuracy, MCC 27053
FO CIKM18 [39] Stock Movement Prediction Accuracy, MCC 4967
Total FO 33490
RM German [11] Credit Scoring F1, MCC 1000
RM Australian [24] Credit Scoring F1, MCC 690
RM LendingClub [9] Credit Scoring F1, MCC 13453
RM ccf [9] Fraud Detection F1, MCC 11392
RM ccfraud [9] Fraud Detection F1, MCC 10485
RM polish [9] Financial Distress Identification F1, MCC 8681
RM taiwan [9] Financial Distress Identification F1, MCC 6819
RM ProtoSeguro [9] Claim Analysis F1, MCC 11904
RM travelinsurance [9] Claim Analysis F1, MCC 12665
Total RM 77089
DM FinTrade [41] Stock Trading CR, SR, DV, AV, MD 3384
A BENCHMARK DATASETS
This section provides an overview of the current financial tasks in
the open FinLLM leaderboard. Table 2 provides an overview of the
datasets, tasks, evaluation metrics, and test sizes, while Table ??
provides the corresponding sources.
A.1 Insights
The categorization of datasets offers several important takeaways
for the financial industry, regulators, and AI researchers.
A.1.1 Holistic Evaluation for Industry Applications. The open Fin-
LLM leaderboard covers seven tasks: categories—Information Ex-
traction (IE), Textual Analysis (TA), Question Answering (QA), Text
Generation (TG), Risk Management (RM), Forecasting (FO), and


[Page 11]
Open FinLLM Leaderboard: Towards Financial AI Readiness ICAIF 24, Nov. 15, NY, USA
Decision-Making (DM). Such a broad coverage allows industry pro-
fessionals to identify models suited for specific applications, such as
sentiment analysis (TA) for market predictions or risk management
(RM) for credit scoring and fraud detection.
A.1.2 Takeaway from Initial Evaluations. Initial results show that
general-purpose models like GPT-4 often underperform in financial-
specific tasks such as Relation Extraction (IE) or Financial QA (QA).
In contrast, models fine-tuned on financial datasets, such as Fin-
LLaMA, perform better in tasks like stock movement forecasting
(FO), suggesting that domain-specific training is critical for finan-
cial tasks. This highlights the need for organizations to focus on
models tailored to financial data for high-stakes decision-making.
A.1.3 Implications for Regulators. Regulatory bodies, such as cen-
tral banks or the SEC, could use the open FinLLM leaderboard’s
evaluations to assess AI models in financial institutions. The leader-
board provides a transparent way to evaluate models for tasks like
fraud detection (RM) and compliance monitoring (IE), helping regu-
lators establish baseline performance for AI models in finance. The
zero-shot evaluations also ensure models are tested on unseen tasks,
providing realistic assessments for evolving market conditions.
A.1.4 AI Readiness in Finance. From a research perspective, the
open FinLLM leaderboard’s comprehensive evaluations highlight
areas where financial LLMs excel and where further improvements
are needed. The diverse financial tasks will encourage the develop-
ment of AI models that are close to real-world adoption.
B FEATURES
This section describes the features of the open FinLLM leaderboard.
B.1 Beyond Scores: Understanding Performance
Our team’s extensive experience in the financial Large Language
Model (LLM) sector has inspired us to take the next step in advanc-
ing this field: the development of the Open Financial LLM Leader-
board. While traditional benchmarks provide useful numerical
scores for various tasks, they often fail to explain what these scores
mean in practice, especially for users unfamiliar with financial-
specific tasks. This realization motivated us to design a benchmark
that not only delivers scores but also provides deeper insights into
model performance and usability.
B.1.1 From Experience to the Open Financial LLM Leaderboard.
Fig. 8 highlights our journey from leveraging user experiences to
advancing AI readiness in financial applications. User feedback
has been critical in shaping this project, allowing us to create a
leaderboard that evaluates FinLLMs not only on their task-specific
performance but also on their readiness for real-world financial
tasks.
B.1.2 Moving Beyond Scores. Traditional benchmarks typically
provide tables of task-specific scores, as shown in Fig. 9. While
these scores are useful for comparing models, they often lack con-
text and practical interpretation for non-expert users. For example,
users unfamiliar with financial tasks like sentiment analysis or com-
pliance monitoring may struggle to understand how these scores
relate to their specific needs.
Figure 8: From user experiences to AI readiness: The iterative
process of evaluating FinLLMs through the open leaderboard.
Figure 9: Integration of additional benchmarks: Traditional
task-specific scores provide a foundation but may lack inter-
pretability for non-expert users.
To address this gap, we designed the Open Financial LLM Leader-
board to go beyond just delivering numerical scores. It provides
insights into how models perform under specific financial scenarios,
enabling users to connect scores to real-world applications.
This feature enables users to move beyond the surface-level
scores and dive into qualitative aspects of LLM performance, such as
accuracy, relevance, and susceptibility to errors like hallucinations
or misinformation. For instance, users can identify whether a model
correctly interprets financial terms or generates erroneous outputs
in high-stakes scenarios.
B.1.3 Opening the Black-Box of Financial Task Evaluation. The
inclusion of side-by-side comparisons helps us move beyond the
black-box nature of traditional benchmarks. It allows for the identi-
fication of nuanced performance issues, such as:
• Error patterns related to hallucinations or misinformation.
• Strengths and weaknesses in interpreting financial documents.
• Practical usability for specific financial tasks like risk manage-
ment or decision-making.
By integrating these features, the Open Financial LLM Leader-
board not only evaluates model accuracy but also enhances trans-
parency, providing users with actionable insights for model selec-
tion and application.


[Page 12]
ICAIF 24, Nov. 15, NY, USA
Shengyuan Colin Lin, Felix Tian, Keyi Wang, Xingjian Zhao, Jimin Huang, Qianqian Xie, Luca Borella, Matt White, Christina Dan Wang, Kairong Xiao, Xiao-Yang Liu Yanglet,
and Li Deng
Figure 10: Evaluation workflow in the Open Financial LLM
Leaderboard. Users can compare models side by side for
deeper insights into their qualitative performance.
C USE SCENARIOS
C.1 (Simple) Definitions and Financial Events
C.1.1 Definitions. Financial concepts are not easy to understand.
A chatbot could democratize financial knowledge to users with
little background.
LLMs can be a reliable source for general public to understand
financial terms and definitions. Fig. 11 show how a chatbot explains:
“What is a Ponzi Scheme?” The LLM responds with a definition
and characteristics, where texts highlighted in green match the
official definition of Ponzi scheme. Fig. 12 shows another example
with “Flash Crash”. The LLM provides an explanation, where texts
highlighted in green match widely accepted definitions.
C.1.2 Understanding Financial Events. LLMs can explain financial
events and help public users understand the overall significance of
the event. In Fig. 13, the user asks about the GME event, and the LLM
explains the event in ways matching the general understanding of
the event’s cause and impact. Correct explanations are highlighted
in green. However, when it comes to numbers, it inaccurately gives
a peak price, shown in red. The actual peak price was around 95$.
While LLMs can accurately convey the core narrative of complex
events, they could sometimes fail to give reliable numerical details.
C.2 Efficiant Legal Consultation Prep
We illustrate how using an LLM model to refine questions before
a legal consultation, which facilitates more focused and efficient
communication with lawyers, and thus helps users save time and
reduce costs.
C.2.1 Lawyer Consultation Cost Comparison. Fig. 14 demonstrates
the cost implications of using an LLM to refine questions before a
legal consultation. In the traditional consultation workflow, the user
engages in repetitive back-and-forth QA with the lawyer, which is
time-consuming and leads to higher fees. By contrast, using an LLM
to refine and organize questions beforehand enables more focused
Figure 11: A simple Q&A example where a user asks “What is
a Ponzi Scheme?” Text highlighted in Green indicates correct
information provided by GPT-4o.
and efficient discussions with the lawyer, significantly reducing
consultation time and associated costs. For example, without prepa-
ration, a consultation might last several hours, incurring substantial
costs. However, with LLM assistance, the user can streamline the
process, potentially reducing the session to a fraction of the time
and lowering the overall cost.
C.2.2 Example of Question Refinement. Fig. 15 provides an ex-
ample use scenario where the user suspects they might be non-
compliant with investment fund usage terms and wants to clarify
their position before consulting a lawyer. The LLM assists by gen-
erating a list of specific, refined questions to present to the lawyer,
reducing the consultation time and ensuring that key contract com-
pliance areas are covered.
C.2.3 Detailed Analysis of Back-and-Forth QA. Fig. 16 illustrates
inefficiencies in back-and-forth QA interactions, especially when
users lack financial or legal expertise. Below is a concise analysis
of the example.


[Page 13]
Open FinLLM Leaderboard: Towards Financial AI Readiness ICAIF 24, Nov. 15, NY, USA
Figure 12: A Q&A example about a Flash Crash. Text in green
indicates correct explanatory details provided by the LLM.
Key Inefficiencies:
• Repetitive Questions: The user repeatedly asks similar
questions (e.g., misusing funds for a festival),.
• Basic Concept Clarifications: Queries about fundamental
terms (e.g., reporting obligations) show a lack of preparation.
• Unrealistic Proposals: Suggestions like simply promising
compliance reflect unrealistic expectations.
• Cost Implications: Lawyers charge for their time, making
inefficient interactions expensive.
Benefits of Using an LLM:.
Figure 13: An example Q&A about the GME event. Text in
Green indicates correct conceptual explanations. Text in Red
marks an incorrect numeric detail.
• Cost Savings: LLMs handle repetitive or basic queries at no
cost.
• Preparation: LLMs help refine user questions, streamlining
subsequent lawyer consultations.


[Page 14]
ICAIF 24, Nov. 15, NY, USA
Shengyuan Colin Lin, Felix Tian, Keyi Wang, Xingjian Zhao, Jimin Huang, Qianqian Xie, Luca Borella, Matt White, Christina Dan Wang, Kairong Xiao, Xiao-Yang Liu Yanglet,
and Li Deng
Figure 14: Comparison of lawyer consultation costs with and
without pre-consultation question refinement using an LLM.
• Availability: Instant, 24/7 responses reduce delays.
C.3 General Publics vs. LLM-Assisted Financial
Document Analysis
Fig. 17 illustrates the difference between how the general public
and an LLM-assisted user approach financial documents. Without
assistance, general users may struggle to understand complex fi-
nancial reports, leading to confusion and limited comprehension.
However, with the help of an LLM, financial documents are sim-
plified, enabling the general public to achieve a professional-level
understanding and make more informed decisions.
C.3.1 Example of Financial Report Analysis. Fig. 18 provides an
example scenario where the user uploads a financial report and
prompts the LLM for a summary of Tesla’s revenue and profit trends
for Q2 2024. The LLM generates a summary that highlights revenue
breakdown, profitability, and key factors affecting trends, helping
the user to quickly understand complex financial document.
C.4 AI-Driven Regulatory Compliance in
Capital Markets
C.4.1 Data Quality Challenges in Capital Markets. Within the Fi-
nancial Services industry, and especially within capital markets,
ensuring data quality remains a persistent challenge even with
standardized data models and agreed formats for communicating
derivative lifecycle details. Key issues include:
• Heterogeneous handling of trade attributes/fields across or-
ganizations
• Regulatory mandates for trade repositories to normalize dis-
parate data
• System-to-system variations in data field implementations
C.4.2 End-to-End Solution Architecture. We demonstrate an AI-
driven pipeline linking unstructured regulatory texts to actionable
data quality insights through four key stages:
(1) Stage 0: Raw Trade Data - FpML XML from counterparty
systems
(2) Stage 1: CDM Conversion - JSON transformation using
Digital Regulatory Reporting (DRR) engine
(3) Stage 2: Regulatory Mapping - Generation of ESMA EMIR
reports
(4) Stage 3: Rule Validation - Automated checks against EMIR
validation rules
(5) Stage 4: Error Resolution - Chatbot-assisted diagnosis and
correction
C.4.3 Implementation Example. Figure 20 demonstrates the error
resolution process for a missingreportSubmittingEntityID field,
a common EMIR compliance failure:
C.5 XBRL Analytics
A common scenario for XBRL analysis is analyzing financial state-
ments to calculate financial ratios or to make financial forecasts.
C.5.1 Failure Case: ROA Calculation. Figs. 21, 22 and 23 show
some failure cases when calculating Coca-Cola’s return on assets
(ROA) in FY2023. Fig. 25 8 (a) and (b) shows the parts in financial
statements related to this analysis. The model used is GPT-4o.
XBRL File Parsing . As shown in Fig. 21, we send the query
of Coca-Cola’s ROA in FY2023 and upload the XBRL instance file
(in XML format) 9. The model fails to parse the XBRL file and
extract corresponding values. In the model’s generated code, it uses
the incorrect "yyyy-mm-dd" or "yyyy" format for contextRef to
extract values. In this XBRL file, contextRef is in the "c-n" format
where 𝑛 is the assigned sequence number.
Contexts. There are failure cases in identifying the contexts:
• Query with full information . With the same query and file as
above, as shown in Fig. 22, although the model parses the XBRL
file successfully, it fails to identify the context reference of net
income in FY2023. In its generated code to extract the net income,
the model uses the incorrect contextRef of "c-31, " where the
correct reference is "c-1. " This mistake may be due to the noisy
information in the file: "c-31" is a specific context reference used
in the statement of shareholders’ equity in FY2023, while "c-1" is
the general context reference for FY2023.
• Query with specific information . To provide more specific
information, as shown in Fig. 23, we concatenate the query with
the income statement and balance sheet in FY2023 from the XBRL
instance file in XML format. Although the model gives the correct
final result, it makes a mistake in recognizing the context refer-
ence and values for total assets in FY2022 and FY2023. The correct
contextRef and value for FY2023 is "c-23" and $97, 703, 000, 000,
and "c-26" and $92, 763, 000, 000 for FY2022.
Concepts. We also ask the related concepts in follow-up ques-
tions, including the definition of FY2023, the meaning of "KO" in
the name of the uploaded file, the tag "us-gaap:NetIncomeLoss"
and "us-gaap:Assets, " and the unit measure of net income and total
assets. The model’s responses are correct.
Financial Ratio Formula. We also ask about the source of the
formula for ROA. The model derives the ROA formula from its
internal knowledge base, which is built on principles of financial
analysis and accounting learned during training.
Calculation. In the case when the full file is uploaded, as shown
in Fig. 22, the model generates and executes code to perform the
8Obtained from 10-K filings from https://www.sec.gov/edgar/browse/?CIK=21344&
owner=exclude
9https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/21344/000002134424000009/ko-
20231231_htm.xml


[Page 15]
Open FinLLM Leaderboard: Towards Financial AI Readiness ICAIF 24, Nov. 15, NY, USA
Figure 15: Prompt example and LLM-generated refined questions to aid in lawyer consultation regarding investment fund
usage compliance.
calculation. When the query concatenated with the file sections is
sent as input, the model performed the calculation itself based on
the data provided in the XBRL tags and the financial formula.
Other settings. Here we show the analysis for Coca Cola’s ROA
in FY2023 in different settings.
• Closed-book testing . We first test GPT-4o in a closed-book
setting, without financial statements or financial ratio formula
provided in the query and without online search function. When
directly asked about the ROA of Coca Cola in FY2023, GPT-4o
fails to give the answer, saying that it has no access to real-time
financial data for Coca-Cola. It only gives instructions to find the
financial statements in the annual reports and gives a formula to
calculate ROA, the net income divided by the total average assets
for the period.
• Closed-book testing of stock ticker. We replace the firm name
"Coca Cola" with its stock ticker "KO" in the query. The model can
successfully recognize the company as The Coca-Cola Company
(KO), but still fails to give the answer with the same reason.
• Online search. We send the same query to GPT-4o with online
search function. The model returns the values of financial items,
the formula, and the ROA of 10.97%, which are directly obtained


[Page 16]
ICAIF 24, Nov. 15, NY, USA
Shengyuan Colin Lin, Felix Tian, Keyi Wang, Xingjian Zhao, Jimin Huang, Qianqian Xie, Luca Borella, Matt White, Christina Dan Wang, Kairong Xiao, Xiao-Yang Liu Yanglet,
and Li Deng
Figure 16: Example of inefficient back-and-forth QA. This scenario could occur between a user and a lawyer or an LLM. However,
an LLM can handle these types of repetitive or basic questions without incurring additional costs. On the other hand, lawyers
charge for their time, making such interactions expensive.
from the Stock Data Online website10, without performing calcu-
lations. The formula for ROA on the website is to divide the net
10Retrieved on Nov 13, 2024 from https://stock-data.online/stock/ko/profitability-
ratio/return-on-assets
income in FY2023 ($10,714,000) by the assets at the end of FY2023
($97,703,000). A more accurate formula for ROA is to divide the
net income by the average total assets at the end and beginning


[Page 17]
Open FinLLM Leaderboard: Towards Financial AI Readiness ICAIF 24, Nov. 15, NY, USA
Figure 17: General public vs. LLM-assisted financial docu-
ment analysis. FinLLMs will upgrade the financial analytical
capability of the general public to a professional-level.
of the year. Although all the values needed for the more accurate
calculation are available on the website and the model correctly
answers the formula in the closed book setting, GPT-4o still gets
the inaccurate results directly from the website.
• Online search with formula . We send the query and formula
to GPT-4o with online search function. The model obtains the
value of financial terms from Macrotrends webiste 11. Then it
performs the calculation itself based on the provided formula.
The returned result is 11.25%, which is correct.
• Chain-of-thought (CoT). When only the query is sent to ChatGPT-
o1-preview, the model follows the steps of assessing knowledge,
ensuring data accuracy, assessing current financial status, assess-
ing ROA, and assessing current data. It doesn’t have knowledge
about FY2023 and provides the ROA in FY2022. However, its data
for FY2022 are inaccurate. We then send the query concatenated
with the related segments in the XBRL file 12, and the model
performs the analytics correctly.
C.5.2 Failure Case: Revenue Forecasting . Fig. 24 shows a fail-
ure case of revenue forecasting for Coca-Cola. The task is to use
the average revenue growth rate from FY2019 to FY2023 to predict
revenues in the future 3 years. The income statements for FY2021,
FY2022, and FY2023 from XBRL instance files are concatenated to
the query. The model used is GPT-4o.
Context. The model correctly identifies and extracts revenues
from FY2019 to FY2023. Fig. 25 (a), (c), and (d) shows the Coca-Cola’s
income statements.
Financial formula. The model uses the correct formulas to
calculate the growth rate, the average growth rate, and the predicted
revenue.
Calculation. The model makes some mistakes in its calculation
process, as highlighted in gray in Fig. 24. When calculating the
growth rates of FY2020 and FY2023, the model doesn’t round the
answers correctly. The correct roundings are −11.41% and 6.39%,
respectively. In the calculation of the average growth rate, us-
ing values obtained from the previous steps, the answer 5.34%
11Retrived on Nov 13, 2024 from https://www.macrotrends.net/stocks/charts/KO/
cocacola/total-assets
12ChatGPT-o1-preview currently doesn’t support file uploading and online search
is wrong, which should be 5.84%. Furthermore, when calculating
revenue for FY2025 and FY2026 using the values in the formula,
the answers are wrong, where 48, 197 × ( 1 + 0.0534) ≈ 50, 770 and
50, 775 × ( 1 + 0.0534) ≈ 53, 486. If all calculations are correct, the
predicted revenue is approximately $48, 422 million for FY2024,
$51, 245 million for FY2025, and $54, 232 million for FY2026.


[Page 18]
ICAIF 24, Nov. 15, NY, USA
Shengyuan Colin Lin, Felix Tian, Keyi Wang, Xingjian Zhao, Jimin Huang, Qianqian Xie, Luca Borella, Matt White, Christina Dan Wang, Kairong Xiao, Xiao-Yang Liu Yanglet,
and Li Deng
Figure 18: Example of financial report analysis with highlighted errors and corrections. Text marked in *red* indicates
inaccuracies in the LLM’s interpretation, such as misunderstanding revenue trends or being misled by year-over-year (YOY)
changes. Text marked in *green* showcases accurate information, reflecting the LLM’s correct analysis of numerical data and
trend direction.
Figure 19: Data quality resolution workflow showing Stage
0 (Raw FpML data) through Stage 4 (Chatbot-assisted error
correction).


[Page 19]
Open FinLLM Leaderboard: Towards Financial AI Readiness ICAIF 24, Nov. 15, NY, USA
Figure 20: Example of error resolution with highlighted errors and corrections. Text marked in Green showcases correct
information and corrections identified by LLM.


[Page 20]
ICAIF 24, Nov. 15, NY, USA
Shengyuan Colin Lin, Felix Tian, Keyi Wang, Xingjian Zhao, Jimin Huang, Qianqian Xie, Luca Borella, Matt White, Christina Dan Wang, Kairong Xiao, Xiao-Yang Liu Yanglet,
and Li Deng
Figure 21: A failure case for XBRL analytics. The model is GPT-4o. The XBRL file is uploaded. Sentences in gray are where
failure occurs. The model cannot parse the XBRL file correctly. In its code for analysis, it doesn’t use contextRef correctly,
which is not ’yyyy-mm-dd’ or ’yyyy’ format.


[Page 21]
Open FinLLM Leaderboard: Towards Financial AI Readiness ICAIF 24, Nov. 15, NY, USA
Figure 22: A failure case for XBRL analytics. The model is GPT-4o. The XBRL file is uploaded. Sentences in gray are where
failure occurs. The model cannot identify the contexts for net income correctly. In its code for analysis, it uses the incorrect
contextRef of "c-31", which should be "c-1"


[Page 22]
ICAIF 24, Nov. 15, NY, USA
Shengyuan Colin Lin, Felix Tian, Keyi Wang, Xingjian Zhao, Jimin Huang, Qianqian Xie, Luca Borella, Matt White, Christina Dan Wang, Kairong Xiao, Xiao-Yang Liu Yanglet,
and Li Deng
Figure 23: A failure case for XBRL analytics. The model is GPT-4o. Not all XBRL content is shown in the picture. Sentences in gray
are where failure occurs. The contextRef and values for total assets are recognized wrongly. Fig. 25 shows the income statements
in the presentation mode. The contextRef should be “c-23” and the value is $97,703,000,000 for FY2023. The contextRef should
be “c-26” and the value is $92,763,000,000 for FY2022.


[Page 23]
Open FinLLM Leaderboard: Towards Financial AI Readiness ICAIF 24, Nov. 15, NY, USA
Figure 24: A failure case of financial math calculations in XBRL filings. The model is GPT-4o and it makes mistakes when
calculating the formula in gray. Fig. 25 shows the income statements.


[Page 24]
ICAIF 24, Nov. 15, NY, USA
Shengyuan Colin Lin, Felix Tian, Keyi Wang, Xingjian Zhao, Jimin Huang, Qianqian Xie, Luca Borella, Matt White, Christina Dan Wang, Kairong Xiao, Xiao-Yang Liu Yanglet,
and Li Deng
Figure 25: Parts from the financial statements of Coca-Cola.


[Page 25]
Open FinLLM Leaderboard: Towards Financial AI Readiness ICAIF 24, Nov. 15, NY, USA
Table 3: An example of the Misinformation (MS) task, regarding misinformation correction in the SEC regulation context.
Texts in red indicate the non-existing infomation generated by the LLM.


[Page 26]
ICAIF 24, Nov. 15, NY, USA
Shengyuan Colin Lin, Felix Tian, Keyi Wang, Xingjian Zhao, Jimin Huang, Qianqian Xie, Luca Borella, Matt White, Christina Dan Wang, Kairong Xiao, Xiao-Yang Liu Yanglet,
and Li Deng
Table 4: An example of the Regulatory Compliance (RC) task, regarding SEC Rules of Practice related to “Appearance and
Practice before the Commission".