[Page 1]
TradeFM: A Generative Foundation Model for
Trade-flow and Market Microstructure
Maxime Kawawa-Beaudan * Srijan Sood *
Kassiani Papasotiriou Daniel Borrajo Manuela V eloso
J.P. Morgan AI Research, New York, NY, USA
Abstract
Foundation models have transformed domains from language to genomics by learning general-purpose
representations from large-scale, heterogeneous data. We introduce TradeFM, a 524M-parameter
generative Transformer that brings this paradigm to market microstructure, learning directly from billions
of trade events across >9K equities. To enable cross-asset generalization, we develop scale-invariant
features and a universal tokenization scheme that map the heterogeneous, multi-modal event stream of
order flow into a unified discrete sequence – eliminating asset-specific calibration. Integrated with a
deterministic market simulator, TradeFM-generated rollouts reproduce key stylized facts of financial
returns, including heavy tails, volatility clustering, and absence of return autocorrelation. Quantitatively,
TradeFM achieves 2–3×lower distributional error than Compound Hawkes baselines and generalizes
zero-shot to geographically out-of-distribution APAC markets with moderate perplexity degradation.
Together, these results suggest that scale-invariant trade representations capture transferable structure
in market microstructure, opening a path toward synthetic data generation, stress testing, and learning-
based trading agents.
1. Introduction
Financial markets are complex adaptive systems where the strategic interactions of heterogeneous participants
give rise to high-frequency, non-stationary dynamics (Bouchaud, 2010). The atomic record of these interactions is
order flow: the stream of buy and sell orders submitted to the market (Sirignano & Cont, 2021). Modeling
order flow is a formidable challenge – the statistical properties of trade data vary dramatically across assets,
liquidity regimes, and time periods (Pasca, 2015), and any single participant observes only a partial view of the
true market state.
Despite this complexity, there is strong evidence that price formation followsuniversalprinciples across markets.
Sirignano & Cont (2021) showed that a single deep learning model trained on pooled multi-stock data outperforms
asset-specific models, even for held-out stocks. This finding motivates a natural question:can a single foundation
model learn a general-purpose representation of market mechanics from raw, multi-asset order flow?
We answer in the affirmative withT radeFM, a 524M-parameter decoder-only Transformer pre-trained on over
10 billion tokens from>9K US equities. Our contributions are fourfold:
1. T radeFM: A large-scale generative foundation model for market microstructure that learns unified trade-flow
dynamics from billions of transactions across the breadth of the US equity market.
2. Learning from Partial Observations: Unlike prior deep learning approaches that require the full limit
order book as input (Table 1), TradeFM learns from a partially observed market state – the event stream
available to any single participant – demonstrating that a foundation model for microstructure does not
require privileged access to the full order book.
*Equal contribution. Correspondence to: Srijan Sood,<{first name}.{last name}@jpmorgan.com>.
1
arXiv:2602.23784v1  [cs.LG]  27 Feb 2026


[Page 2]
T radeFM: A Generative F oundation Model for T rade-flow and Market Microstructure
3. Scale-Invariant Representation and Tokenization: An end-to-end methodology that transforms
raw, heterogeneous trade data into a unified discrete sequence via scale-invariant features and a universal
tokenization scheme, enabling a single model to generalize across diverse assets and liquidity regimes without
asset-specific calibration.
4. Closed-Loop Market Simulation: Integration of the pre-trained model with a deterministic market
simulator, creating a high-fidelity environment for evaluating realism via stylized fact reproduction, studying
market impact, and training learning-based agents.
In closed-loop evaluation, TradeFM-generated rollouts reproduce canonical stylized facts of financial returns.
Quantitatively, it achieves 2–3×lower distributional error than Compound Hawkes baselines and generalizes
zero-shot to out-of-distribution APAC markets with moderate perplexity degradation.
2. Background
2.1. The Mechanics of Modern Electronic Markets
To provide context for a general AI/ML audience, we briefly introduce the core concepts of market microstructure
fundamental to this work, which are standard features of modern electronic markets (Hasbrouck, 2007).
Financial markets are predominantly organized around aLimit Order Book (LOB), a real-time record of all
outstanding orders for a security that functions as a continuous, double-sided auction. It consists of abid(buy)
side and anask(sell) side; the midpoint between the highest bid and the lowest ask is an asset’smid-price.
The ease with which an asset can be bought or sold quickly at a stable price is the asset’sliquidity.
Market participants interact with the LOB through a sequence of actions, collectively known asorder flow.
Participants may submitlimit orderswith a specific price limit, which sit on the book waiting to be matched.
The distance between theorder priceand the midprice is theprice depth, quoted inticks(the minimum
price increment, typically$0.01) orbasis points(bps; 0.01% of the price). They may also submitmarket
ordersfor immediate execution against resting limit orders starting at the best bid/ask, andcancellations
to withdraw resting orders. When an incoming order is matched with a resting one, afill(or trade execution)
occurs. This matching process is generally governed by a deterministicprice-time priorityalgorithm, where
orders are first prioritized by price and then by time of submission. These elements and mechanisms constitute
market microstructure.
2.2. Stylized F acts as Emergent Properties
The strategic interactions of market participants give rise to endogenous market dynamics (Bouchaud, 2010).
These dynamics, in turn, give rise to universal and persistent statistical properties known asstylized facts. These
facts are observed across a wide range of assets, markets, and time periods, and serve as a crucial benchmark for
the realism of any generative market model (Cont, 2001; Ratliff-Crain et al., 2025). Key stylized facts include:
• Heavy-T ailed Returns: Returns are leptokurtic – extreme movements occur far more frequently than a
Gaussian predicts.
• V olatility Clustering: High-volatility periods cluster together, manifesting as slowly decaying autocorrela-
tion of absolute returns.
• Lack of Autocorrelation in Returns: Consistent with efficient markets, return autocorrelation is
insignificant beyond very short lags.
3. Related Work
The modeling of market microstructure has evolved from explicit, theory-driven formulations toward implicit,
data-driven representation learning. Our work continues this trajectory, positioning a generative foundation
model as the natural next step to learn universal market dynamics directly from raw, heterogeneous data.
2


[Page 3]
T radeFM: A Generative F oundation Model for T rade-flow and Market Microstructure
3.1. Market Microstructure and Order Flow Modeling
Classical Stochastic ModelsA significant body of literature models order arrival times using point processes,
such as Hawkes processes, to capture the self-exciting nature of order flow (Bacry et al., 2015). More sophisticated
approaches adopt Compound Hawkes processes, which combine Hawkes processes to model interarrival times
with other fitted empirical distributions to model additional features like volumes and price depths (Jain et al.,
2024). While providing strong theoretical grounding, these models rely on specific parametric assumptions
(e.g., Gaussianity) that are unable to capture the heavy-tailed nature of market returns. Similarly, ensemble
methods based on Hidden Markov Models have been applied to classify sequences of trade activity, demonstrating
that probabilistic sequence models capture meaningful structure in financial data even with limited labeled
examples (Kawawa-Beaudan et al., 2024).
Agent-Based ModelsAgent-based models (ABMs) simulate market dynamics by defining the behavior of
individual participants and observing the emergent properties of the system (Byrd et al., 2020). While ABMs
have historically required hand-crafting agent behaviors, recent approaches have shown success in calibrating
agents on real market data (Dwarakanath et al., 2024). Our work contributes to this line of research by enabling
the learning of complex market dynamics, which can serve as a foundation for more sophisticated agent-based
modeling.
Early Deep Learning ModelsThe application of deep learning to LOB data was pioneered by models like
DeepLOB (Zhang et al., 2019). These models demonstrated the potential of learning features directly from data
but were typically trained on a subset of instruments. This limits their ability to learn universal representations
across diverse assets and market conditions.
3.2. T ransformers and F oundation Models in Finance
The Transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017) has been widely applied across domains including genomics (Ji
et al., 2021), time-series forecasting (Wen et al., 2023), and payment transaction modeling (Raman et al.,
2024). In market microstructure, recent transformer models focus on discriminative prediction for short-term
forecasting (Berti & Kasneci, 2025; Xiao et al., 2025). These approaches operate on full limit order book snapshots
and target single or few instruments. Generative adversarial networks (Wiese et al., 2020) and diffusion-based
approaches have also been applied to financial data generation. These methods typically target price or return
series rather than event-level order flow, and have not been evaluated at multi-asset scale.
A prominent generative approach is MaRS (Li et al., 2025), a market simulator with a foundation model backbone.
While building on design principles from Li et al. (2025), TradeFM distinguishes itself in three dimensions
(Table 1): (1) pre-training data explicitly constructed tomaximize heterogeneityacross thousands of assets,
sectors, and liquidity regimes; (2)partial observability– learning from Level 3 trade messages rather than full
LOB snapshots, matching the information available to real market participants; and (3)zero-shot geographic
generalizationto unseen markets, enabled by scale-invariant feature design rooted in Universal Price Formation
theory (Sirignano & Cont, 2021). Direct quantitative comparison with MaRS is infeasible: it requires limit order
book context as input (strictly more information than event streams), is trained on a different market (Chinese
equities), and covers fewer assets (∼500 vs.>9K).
Model Input Assets Params Zero-Shot
DeepLOB Full LOB 5 60K No
LOBS5 Full LOB 2 6.3M No
MaRS Full LOB 500∼1B No
T radeFM Event stream>9K 524M Y es
Table 1.Comparison with related microstructure models.TradeFM uniquely combines partial observability,
large-scale multi-asset training, and zero-shot geographic generalization.
4. Problem Formulation
We formulate the task of modeling market microstructure as a generative, autoregressive sequence modeling
problem. Let the market dynamics be represented by a sequence of discrete trade events, E = (e1,e 2,...,eT ).
3


[Page 4]
T radeFM: A Generative F oundation Model for T rade-flow and Market Microstructure
Figure 1.T rade feature distributions.Canonical distributions for core trade features, conditioned on liquidity. Price
features are leptokurtic (Laplace); volume follows a heavy-tailed power-law; and interarrival time is exponential.
The objective is to learn the conditional probability distribution P (et|e<t), where e<t denotes the sequence of
events preceding et. By learning this distribution, the model can generate realistic sequences of future trade
events, simulating the market’s evolution.
4.1. T rade Event Representation
A single trade event et is a multi-feature tuple capturing the state of the market at the moment of a transaction.
Formally, an event is represented as et = (∆ tt,δpt,vt,at,st), where the core features are: ∆ tt: Interarrival time
since the previous event (seconds); δpt: Price depth of the transaction (basis points); vt: Volume of the transaction
(shares); at: The action/order type (e.g., order submission, cancellation); st: The side of the initiating order
(buy/bid or sell/ask). The distributions of these features are depicted in Figure 1.
4.2. Key T echnical Challenges
Modeling this data stream presents challenges inherent to high-frequency markets: theHeterogeneity and
Distribution Shiftacross diverse assets and varying time periods; theSparsity and Irregularityof the
asynchronous event stream; thePartial Observabilityof the true market state from transaction data; and a
High-Dimensional, Multi-Modal F eature Spacecombining continuous and categorical values.
5. Data and Feature Engineering
Our methodology is designed to process raw, heterogeneous transaction data at scale and transform it into a
standardized format suitable for a generative foundation model. This pipeline consists of data curation, robust
feature engineering, and a novel tokenization scheme.
5.1. Data Sources and Scale
The model is pre-trained on a proprietary dataset built from billions of raw, tick-level US equities transactions,
spanning 368 trading days from February 2024 to September 2025, across the breadth of the US equities market.
This represents over 19 billion tokens across 1.9 million date-asset pairs. We employ a temporal hold-out strategy,
reserving January 2025 onward across all assets for the test set, yielding a training set of 10.7 billion tokens and a
test set of 8.7 billion tokens. The tokenizer is calibrated on the first 30 days of the training data, February 2024.
For evaluating out-of-distribution generalization we also hold out one month of data from APAC regions, namely
Jan. 2025, for both Japan and China.
5.2. Mid-Price Estimation
A robust estimate of the true market mid-price ( pmid
t ) is critical for normalizing price-related features. In our
partial-information setting, the mid-price is unobserved; we only see noisy execution prices ( pexec
t ). Building on
the classical Volume-Weighted A verage Price (Berkowitz et al., 1988), we introduceExponentially-W eighted
VW AP (EW-VW AP), a time-aware estimator that jointly accounts for trade volume and recency: ˆpEW-VW AP
t =
4


[Page 5]
T radeFM: A Generative F oundation Model for T rade-flow and Market Microstructure
EMA(pexec
t ·vt)/EMA(vt). The smoothing factor αis determined by a time-based halflife, ensuring that the
estimate gives more weight to larger and more recent trades, providing a stable and representative price benchmark.
Unlike naive rolling averages, EW-VW AP is comparable across assets with vastly different liquidity profiles (see
Appendix A.3, Figure 8).
5.3. Scale-Invariant F eature Construction
The statistical properties of trading data vary widely across sectors, liquidity profiles, and nominal prices. In
raw dollar, share, and second terms, price depths, volumes, and interarrival times for an asset like AAPL may
differ greatly from those of a penny stock. Trade representations must therefore be carefully designed to enforce
homogeneity across assets. Sirignano & Cont (2021) demonstrate that price formation follows universal principles
across stocks: universal models trained on all assets outperform asset-specific models, even for held-out stocks,
suggesting deep learning can learn appropriate normalizations from raw data. Building on this, we explicitly
construct scale-invariant features to enforce homogeneity, extending universality from order book contexts to
heterogeneous event streams across diverse trading venues and market structures.
•Interarrival Time (∆t t): Wall clock time since the previous event:w t−wt−1, in seconds.
• Log-T ransformed V olume (vt): To compress the wide dynamic range of order sizes, which follow heavy-
tailed, power-law distributions (Vyetrenko et al., 2020), we apply a logarithmic transformation: vt = log(1+Vt)
whereV t is the raw share volume.
• Normalized Price Depth ( dt): The depth of a limit order with order price porder
t , relative to the mid-price:
dt = porder
t −ˆpmid
t
ˆpmid
t
, normalizing the raw δpt from the event tuple. This representation is comparable across
differently priced assets, unlike prior work using price depths in ticks.
• Relative Price Level vs. Open (∆ pt): To capture intraday market movement, we quote the current
mid-price relative to the day’s opening price (p 0): ∆p t = ˆpmid
t −p0
p0
.
While price-related features are computed as unit-less ratios, we refer to them in terms of basis points (bps) for
interpretability, where a ratio of 0.01 corresponds to 100 bps. Figure 7 (Appendix A) demonstrates distributional
stationarity of relative features (vs. tick based). Figure 12 (Appendix D.3) demonstrates the subsequent temporal
stability of scale-invariant features.
5.4. Market and Participant-Level Sequences
In downstream applications, TradeFM can be used to model the behavior of the entire market (e.g., for synthetic
data generation) or that of individual participants (e.g., for agent-based modeling). To support this, our training
data includes sequences aggregated at both the market level and the participant level, with approximately a 1.6:1
market-to-participant ratio at the token level. The model receives a binary indicator feature, IMP , to distinguish
between these two contexts.
6. Tokenization
Standard Transformer architectures, as applied in natural language processing, operate on univariate sequences
where each element is a single token from a discrete vocabulary. Our trade event data is a sequence of multi-feature
tuples, each comprising a mix of continuous and categorical values. The core challenge of tokenization is to map
this event stream into a univariate discrete sequence.
6.1. Binning Strategy and Outlier Handling
We discretize each continuous feature by partitioning its distribution into a fixed number of bins. For price-
related features, which have symmetric but highly peaked distributions, we employEqual-F requency Binning
(quantile-based). This ensures that the bins in the dense central region of the distribution have a higher resolution,
while still capturing the less frequent values in the tails. For log-transformed features, like volume and interarrival
5


[Page 6]
T radeFM: A Generative F oundation Model for T rade-flow and Market Microstructure
Figure 2.Calibrated bin edges.Price features (top) use quantile-based binning for high resolution near the mean;
volume and time (bottom) use logarithmic bins to capture their wide dynamic range.
time, we useEqual-Width Binning. Applying equal-width bins to the logarithmic values creates bins that are
effectively logarithmic in the original feature space, providing a way to represent values that span multiple orders
of magnitude.
This hybrid approach ensures a relatively uniform token distribution, preventing the model from wasting capacity
on rare tokens or nearly-empty bins. Before binning, we exclude outliers above the 99th percentile for each
feature, and additionally exclude outliers below the 1st percentile for price depth and price level. We reserve
special bins to represent these out-of-range values to prevent the model from allocating excessive capacity to
extremely rare events. We calibrate this tokenizer on the first 30 days of our data. The calibrated bin edges are
shown in Figure 2.
6.2. Multi-F eature T oken Composition
While our model’s input at each time step is multi-featured, the decoder is trained to predict a single, unidimensional
token, representing the core trade event. Thus, we combine the discrete bin indices of the trade-related features,
(i∆t,iδp,iv,ia,is), into a single composite integer,i trade.
This is accomplished by treating the feature indices as digits in a mixed base number system. Each feature’s
bin index is a “digit”, and the number of possible values for the subsequent features acts as the “base” at each
position. For a concrete example of the encoding process, see Section A.4. The number of bins for each feature
is: nδp= 16 for price depth, nv = 16 for volume, n∆t = 16 for interarrival time, ns = 2 (buy, sell) for side, and
na = 2 (add or cancel order) for action type. The composite trade token itrade, a single integer encoding all
constituent features, is calculated as:
itrade =(ia×ns×nδp×nv×n∆t )+
(is×nδp×nv×n∆t )+
(iδp×nv×n∆t ) + (iv×n∆t ) +i ∆t
(1)
This yields a vocabulary size of 16,384 for the predictable trade tokens. The model input at each time step is a
tuple containing this token along with several non-predicted features used for conditioning. These contextual
features are provided as separate inputs, and are not part of the trade token itrade calculated in Equation 1. The
contextual features are:
•i l: The liquidity bin index ( nl = 3), determined by binning each asset into low, medium, or high liquidity
ranges based on its A verage Daily Volume (ADV).
6


[Page 7]
T radeFM: A Generative F oundation Model for T rade-flow and Market Microstructure
•i ∆p t: The price level change bin index (n ∆p = 32).
•I MP : A binary indicator for market-level vs. participant-level sequences.
The final input is [ il,IMP,i ∆p t,i trade]. This formulation allows the model to be conditioned on broader market
context while focusing its predictive power on the next trade event.
7. TradeFM Architecture
T radeFM is a decoder-only T ransformer, trained from scratch with a custom configuration. The architecture
is based on the Llama family and incorporates enhancements including grouped-query-attention (GQA) and
rotary positional encoding (RoPE) (Touvron et al., 2023). Our model size is524 million parameters, a size
chosen based on Chinchilla scaling laws (Hoffmann et al., 2022) for our dataset size (see Appendix B.2 for detailed
hyperparameter choices). The model is trained on3 Nvidia A100 GPUs; we include detailed training setup
details in Appendix B.3.
7.1. T abular Input Embedding
We employ a tabular embedding approach to handle our multi-feature input tokens (as described in Section 6.2).
Each feature in the input tuple [ il,IMP,i ∆p t,i trade] is first projected into its own embedding space using an
embedding table. These embedding vectors are concatenated and passed through a linear projection layer to
create a unified representation in the model’s hidden dimension.
8. Market Simulator
To evaluate the realism of our generative model, we require an environment that can simulate the market
execution of a sequence of predicted trades. We build a lightweight, deterministic simulator tailored to our specific
experimental setting. Our simulator serves two critical functions: 1) it provides the dynamic, state-dependent
price level features required by our model during generative rollouts, and 2) it allows us to test if the model’s
generated trade flow can reproduce the well-known stylized facts of asset returns.
Figure 3.Closed-loop simulation architecture.TradeFM predicts a trade, the Market Simulator executes it, and the
updated market state is fed back to the model.
7


[Page 8]
T radeFM: A Generative F oundation Model for T rade-flow and Market Microstructure
8.1. Deterministic Design
The simulator is designed to mimic core mechanics of a modern electronic exchange. It maintains a limit order
book (LOB) for an asset, an internal clock, and an estimate of the market mid-price (the midpoint of the best
bid and ask). The order matching engine employsprice-time priority: incoming orders are matched with the
best-priced order on the opposite side of the book, with ties in price broken by selecting the earliest-submitted
resting order (Nasdaq Listing Center, 2024). Before using the simulator to validate our large trade model,we
validate the realism of the simulator itself via stylized factsdiscussed in the Appendix D.2.
8.2. The Closed-Loop Rollout
The simulator creates a closed-loop system where the model and environment interact dynamically. This process,
which we term arollout, is shown in Figure 3 and proceeds as follows:
1. Prediction: Given a history of market events, TradeFM predicts the next event token, itrade. We use
multinomial sampling with a repetition penalty of 1.2 to decode the token.
2. Execution: The predicted event (e.g., order or cancellation) is passed to the simulator, which executes it
against the LOB according to its price-time priority rules.
3.State Update: The simulator updates its internal state, including the LOB and the mid-price.
4. F eedback: The market state is used to generate the contextual features for the next time step, which are
appended to the history and fed back into TradeFM to generate the next prediction.
This recursive loop allows us to generate long, dynamic sequences of market activity. Crucially, it enables the
study of second-order effects like price impact, as the model’s own predictions influence the market state that
conditions its future predictions.
9. Experiments
Evaluating generative models of financial markets presents a unique challenge due to the non-stationary nature
of the data. Rather than relying on next-token perplexity, we evaluate TradeFM by its ability to reproduce
the invariant stylized facts of market behavior (Section 2.2). A model that generates synthetic data exhibiting
these facts has learned the time-invariant structure of the market, not merely memorized historical patterns. We
conduct three experiments: (1)stylized fact reproduction, (2)distributional fidelityof generated order
flow, and (3) out-of-distributiongeneralization and controllability.
BaselinesWe compare against acalibrated Zero-Intelligence (ZI) agent(Gode & Sunder, 1993; Farmer
et al., 2005) and aCompound Hawkesprocess (Bacry et al., 2015; Jain et al., 2024) that models trade
arrivals via self-exciting dynamics with fitted volume and price distributions. Both baselines interact with the
same simulator and evaluation pipeline. Details in Appendix B.6. We adopt ZI and Compound Hawkes as
baselines because they operate on trade-level event streams, matching our partial observability setting. Neural
generative models evaluated in LOB-Bench (Nagy et al., 2025) require full limit order book input, precluding
direct comparison.
9.1. Experiment 1: Stylized F act Reproduction
To validate the realism of the generated market trajectories, we evaluate their ability to reproduce key stylized
facts of log returns ( rt,∆t ). We generate 10 rollouts of 1,024 events for 9 assets across 3 liquidity tiers, for
each of 9 held-out months, conditioned on a context of 1,024 real historical events. For reference, 1,024 events
correspond to approximately 2–5 minutes of market time for high-liquidity assets (e.g., AAPL), 15–60 minutes
for medium-liquidity, and 1–4 hours for low-liquidity assets. We compute autocorrelations over time lags τ, and
evaluate kurtosis over return intervals ∆t r.
8


[Page 9]
T radeFM: A Generative F oundation Model for T rade-flow and Market Microstructure
∆tr Kolmogorov-Smirnov W asserstein
ZI Hawkes T radeFM ZI Hawkes T radeFM
10 0.376 0.0390.013 0.0006 0.00040.0001
30 0.439 0.0750.024 0.0015 0.00120.0002
60 0.429 0.1010.035 0.0027 0.00230.0004
120 0.429 0.0980.043 0.0043 0.00430.0007
Table 2.Log return distributional fidelity .Mean K-S and Wasserstein distances from real data across return intervals
∆ tr (sec), averaged over 9 assets, 3 liquidity tiers, and 9 held-out months. TradeFM achieves 2–3 × lower K-S distance
than Compound Hawkes.
Figure 4.T radeFM model validation.Simulated returns exhibit: (Left) near-zero autocorrelation, (Middle) slowly
decaying autocorrelation of absolute returns (volatility clustering), and (Right) heavy tails and aggregational Gaussianity.
ResultsAs summarized in Figure 4 and Table 2, our simulations successfully reproduce the target stylized
facts, demonstrating a close correspondence with real market data:
• Lack of Autocorrelation: The autocorrelation of simulated log returns (left panel) quickly decays to
statistically insignificant levels as the lag τincreases. This is consistent with the efficient market hypothesis.
The ZI baseline exhibits spurious autocorrelation.
• Long-Range Dependence: The autocorrelation of absolute log returns (middle panel) decays slowly,
indicating that our model has captured the long-memory nature of volatility clustering.
• Heavy T ails: The kurtosis of simulated returns (right) is high for short time scales (∆ tr), confirming the
presence of heavy tails. TradeFM most faithfully captures the leptokurtic nature of returns and its decay
across time scales.
• Aggregational Gaussianity: As ∆ tr increases, the kurtosis of TradeFM correctly approaches that of a
normal distribution, capturing the reversion towards normality over longer time horizons.
Table 2 quantifies these results via the Wasserstein distance ( W1) and Kolmogorov-Smirnov (K-S) statistic
between real and generated log return distributions. TradeFM outperforms all baselines in both metrics across
return intervals.
9.2. Experiment 2: Quantitative Fidelity
While stylized facts confirm that the model captures emergent market dynamics, they do not assess how well the
generated order flow aligns with reality. We conduct a quantitative evaluation of distributional fidelity, adopting
frameworks established in recent benchmarks for generative order flow models (Nagy et al., 2025). As in the
benchmark, we mean-variance normalize distributions before computing Wasserstein distance to make this metric
comparable between quantities.
Using the rollouts described in Section 9.1, we compute the Kolmogorov-Smirnov statistic and Wasserstein
distance between real and generated distributions for key microstructure variables, including Order Volume,
9


[Page 10]
T radeFM: A Generative F oundation Model for T rade-flow and Market Microstructure
Interarrival Times, Bid-Ask Spreads, and Order Book Imbalance. This evaluation averages results across 9 assets,
3 liquidity tiers, and 9 held-out months. As shown in Table 3, TradeFM achieves lower distance metrics than
baseline approaches on most quantities, demonstrating superior fidelity in reproducing the statistical properties
of market data. The notable exception is bid-ask spreads, where the Compound Hawkes baseline achieves lower
K-S distance. We attribute this to the Hawkes process explicitly modeling inter-arrival dynamics that directly
govern spread formation, whereas TradeFM’s spread emerges indirectly from the simulator’s deterministic order
matching logic. This suggests that hybrid approaches combining learned order flow with explicit spread modeling
may yield further improvements. We provide detailed results in Appendix D.3, Figure 14.
The closed-loop evaluation couples model quality with simulator fidelity. Two lines of evidence partially disentangle
their contributions: the ZI control through the identical simulator fails to reproduce stylized facts, and Table 3
evaluates order flow directly before simulator interaction. Full disentanglement remains future work.
Quantity Kolmogorov-Smirnov W asserstein
ZI Hawkes T radeFM ZI Hawkes T radeFM
Spreads 0.4000.2180.238 0.3750.3020.400
Interarrival Times 0.651 0.5150.281 0.415 0.6260.318
Price Depth 0.436 0.2810.169 0.390 0.3480.339
Order Book Imbalance 0.237 0.1550.142 0.200 0.1650.099
Bid Volume 0.4600.2960.386 0.616 0.2780.130
Ask Volume 0.391 0.3800.360 0.638 0.1980.160
Table 3.Distributional fidelity of generated order flow.Mean K-S and Wasserstein distances across 9 assets, 3
liquidity tiers, and 9 held-out months. TradeFM achieves lowest distance on most quantities. Per-month breakdowns in
Appendix D.3, Figure 14.
9.3. Experiment 3: Generalization and Controllability
To validate our claim that TradeFM learns a universal grammar of market microstructure that generalizes beyond
the assets and time periods seen during training, we perform extensive out-of-distribution (OOD) evaluations.
Temporal and Geographic RobustnessFinancial markets are non-stationary, with regimes shifting over
time. We evaluate model performance over a hold-out period from January–September 2025, a period exhibiting
heightened volatility distinct from the 2024 training set. As detailed in Appendix D.3, Figure 14, distance metrics
remain stable over this 9-month horizon.
Figure 5.Zero-shot geographic generalization.Perplexity distributions for TradeFM (trained on US equities)
evaluated on held-out US, China, and Japan data (January 2025) demonstrate cross-geography robustness of scale-invariant
features.
10


[Page 11]
T radeFM: A Generative F oundation Model for T rade-flow and Market Microstructure
Beyond temporal generalization, we assess zero-shot geographic transfer by evaluating TradeFM (trained exclusively
on US equities) on held-out data from China and Japan. Despite substantial microstructural differences – including
Japan’s Itayose batch auction mechanism (vs. US continuous trading), China’s ±10% daily price limits (vs. none
in US), and wider bid-ask spreads in Asian markets (3–10 bps vs. 1–2 bps) – Figure 5 shows moderate perplexity
degradation, with significant overlap between US and APAC distributions. This cross-market generalization
demonstrates that scale-invariant order flow representations capture universal principles of market dynamics.
ControllabilityFinally, we verify that the model respects its conditioning tokens and that its output can
be reliably steered via the indicator features ( IMP and il). We generate 256 context-free trajectories of 512
tokens each, for every combination of market-participant and liquidity indicators. We then analyze the statistical
properties of the raw generated orders by computing the standard deviation of volumes and interarrival times for
each condition.
Figure 6 shows that modulating the indicator tokens has a significant and intuitive effect on the statistical
properties of the generated orders, with two trends:
Figure 6.Controllability experiments.Standard deviation of generated volumes and interarrival times, conditioned on
liquidity ( il) and observation level ( IM P ). The model produces distinct order flow, demonstrating controllable generation.
• The variance of both volume and interarrival time is consistently higher for market-level generation than for
participant-level, aligned with the intuition that the aggregate behavior of an entire market is inherently
more volatile than the behavior of a single participant.
• The model captures linear relationships between liquidity and the variance of interarrival times and volumes.
Collectively, these results demonstrate that TradeFM has learned a generalizable, conditional model of market
behavior, capable of generating statistically and contextually appropriate order flow.
10. Conclusion
We have shown that the complex, emergent dynamics of financial markets can be learned directly from raw,
heterogeneous order flow. Our end-to-end methodology, which combines scale-invariant feature representations
with a universal tokenization scheme, allows a single generative Transformer to generalize across thousands of
diverse assets without asset-specific calibration. The high fidelity of generated data – validated at both the
emergent price dynamics level (Figure 4) and the granular order level (Figure 15, Appendix D.4) – combined
with zero-shot geographic generalization suggests that scale-invariant trade representations capture fundamental,
transferable structure in market microstructure. The closed-loop simulator opens several directions for future
work: privacy-preserving synthetic data generation for illiquid assets, stress testing under counterfactual scenarios,
and training learning-based trading agents via interaction with the simulator (preliminary explorations in
Appendix D.4, D.5, D.6). Validating TradeFM’s utility for these downstream applications remains a key priority.
11


[Page 12]
T radeFM: A Generative F oundation Model for T rade-flow and Market Microstructure
Disclaimer
This paper was prepared for informational purposes by the Artificial Intelligence Research group of JPMorgan
Chase & Co. and its affiliates (”JP Morgan”) and is not a product of the Research Department of JP Morgan.
JP Morgan makes no representation and warranty whatsoever and disclaims all liability, for the completeness,
accuracy or reliability of the information contained herein. This document is not intended as investment research
or investment advice, or a recommendation, offer or solicitation for the purchase or sale of any security, financial
instrument, financial product or service, or to be used in any way for evaluating the merits of participating in any
transaction, and shall not constitute a solicitation under any jurisdiction or to any person, if such solicitation
under such jurisdiction or to such person would be unlawful.
References
Bacry, E., Mastromatteo, I., and Muzy, J.-F. Hawkes processes in finance.Market Microstructure and Liquidity,
1(01):1550005, 2015.
Badaro, G., Saeed, M., and Papotti, P. Transformers for tabular data representation: A survey of models and
applications.Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 11:227–249, 2023.
Berkowitz, S. A., Logue, D. E., and Noser Jr., E. A. The total cost of transactions on the NYSE.The Journal of
Finance, 43(1):97–112, 1988.
Berti, L. and Kasneci, G. TLOB: A novel transformer model with dual attention for stock price trend prediction
with limit order book data.arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.15757, 2025.
Bouchaud, J.-P. The endogenous dynamics of markets: Price impact and feedback loops.arXiv preprint
arXiv:1009.2928, 2010.
Byrd, D., Hybinette, M., and Balch, T. H. ABIDES: Towards high-fidelity multi-agent market simulation. In
Proceedings of the 2020 ACM SIGSIM Conference on Principles of Advanced Discrete Simulation, pp. 11–22,
2020.
Cont, R. Empirical properties of asset returns: Stylized facts and statistical issues.Quantitative Finance, 1(2):
223–236, 2001.
Dwarakanath, K., Vyetrenko, S., Tavallali, P., and Balch, T. ABIDES-Economist: Agent-based simulator of
economic systems with learning agents.arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.09563, 2024.
Farmer, J. D., Patelli, P., and Zovko, I. I. The predictive power of zero intelligence in financial markets.Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences, 102(6):2254–2259, 2005.
Garza, A., Challu, C., and Mergenthaler-Canseco, M. TimeGPT-1.arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.03589, 2023.
Gode, D. K. and Sunder, S. Allocative efficiency of markets with zero-intelligence traders: Market as a partial
substitute for individual rationality.Journal of Political Economy, 101(1):119–137, 1993.
Hasbrouck, J.Empirical Market Microstructure: The Institutions, Economics, and Econometrics of Securities
Trading. Oxford University Press, 2007.
Hoffmann, J., Borgeaud, S., Mensch, A., Buchatskaya, E., Cai, T., Rutherford, E., de Las Casas, D., Hendricks,
L. A., Welbl, J., Clark, A., Hennigan, T., Noland, E., Millican, K., van den Driessche, G., Damoc, B., Guy, A.,
Osindero, S., Simonyan, K., Elsen, E., Rae, J. W., Vinyals, O., and Sifre, L. Training compute-optimal large
language models. InAdvances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 35, pp. 30016–30030, 2022.
Hollmann, N., M¨ uller, S., Purucker, L., Krishnakumar, A., K¨ orfer, M., Hoo, S. B., Schirrmeister, R. T., and
Hutter, F. Accurate predictions on small data with a tabular foundation model.Nature, 637(8045):319–326,
2025.
Jain, K., Firoozye, N., Kochems, J., and Treleaven, P. Limit order book dynamics and order size modelling using
compound Hawkes process.Finance Research Letters, 69:106157, 2024.
12


[Page 13]
T radeFM: A Generative F oundation Model for T rade-flow and Market Microstructure
Ji, Y., Zhou, Z., Liu, H., and Davuluri, R. V. DNABERT: Pre-trained bidirectional encoder representations from
transformers model for DNA-language in genome.Bioinformatics, 37(15):2112–2120, 2021.
Kaplan, J., McCandlish, S., Henighan, T., Brown, T. B., Chess, B., Child, R., Gray, S., Radford, A., Wu, J., and
Amodei, D. Scaling laws for neural language models.arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08361, 2020.
Kawawa-Beaudan, M., Sood, S., Palande, S., Mani, G., Balch, T., and Veloso, M. Ensemble methods for sequence
classification with hidden Markov models.arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.07619, 2024.
Li, J., Liu, Y., Liu, W., Fang, S., Wang, L., Xu, C., and Bian, J. MarS: A financial market simulation engine
powered by generative foundation model. InProceedings of the Thirteenth International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2025.
Muennighoff, N., Rush, A. M., Barak, B., Le Scao, T., Piktus, A., Tazi, N., Pyysalo, S., Wolf, T., and Raffel, C.
Scaling data-constrained language models. InAdvances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 36,
2023.
Nagy, P., Frey, S., Sapora, S., Li, K., Calinescu, A., Zohren, S., and Foerster, J. Generative AI for end-to-end
limit order book modelling: A token-level autoregressive generative model of message flow using a deep state
space network. InProceedings of the Fourth ACM International Conference on AI in Finance, pp. 91–99, 2023.
Nagy, P., Frey, S., Li, K., Sarkar, B., Vyetrenko, S., Zohren, S., Calinescu, A., and Foerster, J. LOB-Bench:
Benchmarking generative AI for finance – an application to limit order book data. InProceedings of the
Forty-Second International Conference on Machine Learning, 2025.
Nasdaq Listing Center. Equity trading rules. https://listingcenter.nasdaq.com/rulebook/nasdaq/rules/
Nasdaq%20Equity%204, 2024.
Pasca, L. A critical review of the main approaches on financial market dynamics modelling.Journal of Heterodox
Economics, 2(2):151–167, 2015. doi: 10.1515/jheec-2015-0017.
Petty, J., van Steenkiste, S., Dasgupta, I., Sha, F., Garrette, D., and Linzen, T. The impact of depth on
compositional generalization in transformer language models. InProceedings of the 2024 Conference of the
North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies
(Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 7239–7252. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2024.
Potluru, V. K., Borrajo, D., Coletta, A., Dalmasso, N., El-Laham, Y., Fons, E., Ghassemi, M., Gopalakrishnan,
S., Gosai, V., Kreaˇ ci´ c, E., Mani, G., Obitayo, S., Paramanand, D., Raman, N., Solonin, M., Sood, S., Vyetrenko,
S., Zhu, H., Veloso, M., and Balch, T. Synthetic data applications in finance.arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.00081,
2024.
Rajbhandari, S., Rasley, J., Ruwase, O., and He, Y. ZeRO: Memory optimizations toward training trillion
parameter models. InSC20: International Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage
and Analysis, pp. 1–16. IEEE, 2020.
Raman, N., Ganesh, S., and Veloso, M. Scalable representation learning for multimodal tabular transactions.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.07851, 2024.
Ratliff-Crain, E., Van Oort, C. M., Koehler, M. T. K., and Tivnan, B. F. Revisiting Cont’s stylized facts for
modern stock markets.Quantitative Finance, 25(9):1343–1373, 2025.
Sirignano, J. and Cont, R. Universal features of price formation in financial markets: Perspectives from deep
learning. InMachine Learning and AI in Finance, pp. 5–15. Routledge, 2021.
Touvron, H., Lavril, T., Izacard, G., Martinet, X., Lachaux, M.-A., Lacroix, T., Rozi` ere, B., Goyal, N., Hambro,
E., Azhar, F., Rodriguez, A., Joulin, A., Grave, E., and Lample, G. LLaMA: Open and efficient foundation
language models.arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.
Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A. N., Kaiser, /suppress L., and Polosukhin, I.
Attention is all you need. InAdvances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 30, 2017.
13


[Page 14]
T radeFM: A Generative F oundation Model for T rade-flow and Market Microstructure
Vyetrenko, S., Byrd, D., Petosa, N., Mahfouz, M., Dervovic, D., Veloso, M., and Balch, T. H. Get real: Realism
metrics for robust limit order book market simulations. InProceedings of the First ACM International
Conference on AI in Finance, pp. 1–8, 2020.
Wen, Q., Zhou, T., Zhang, C., Chen, W., Ma, Z., Yan, J., and Sun, L. Transformers in time series: A survey. In
Proceedings of the Thirty-Second International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 6778–6786, 2023.
Wiese, M., Knobloch, R., Korn, R., and Kretschmer, P. Quant GANs: Deep generation of financial time series.
Quantitative Finance, 20(9):1419–1440, 2020.
Xiao, Y., Ventre, C., Wang, Y., Li, H., Huan, Y., and Liu, B. LiT: Limit order book transformer.Frontiers in
Artificial Intelligence, 8:1616485, 2025.
Zhang, Z., Zohren, S., and Roberts, S. DeepLOB: Deep convolutional neural networks for limit order books.
IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, 67(11):3001–3012, 2019.
14


[Page 15]
T radeFM: A Generative F oundation Model for T rade-flow and Market Microstructure
A. Appendix
A.1. F oundation Models for Structured Data
Figure 7.Tick-based vs. relative features.Properties
of tick-based vs. relative feature construction for the sample
feature ∆ pt, across liquidity profiles. Relative features gener-
alize better across assets than absolute, tick-based features.
This work draws inspiration from the success of founda-
tion models beyond NLP, in domains with structured
sequential data. This paradigm has been successfully
adapted by treating domain-specific sequences as a
form of ”language. ” In genomics, for example, mod-
els treat DNA or protein sequences as sentences to
learn fundamental biological patterns (Ji et al., 2021).
For general-purpose time-series forecasting, large pre-
trained models have demonstrated strong zero-shot
performance on unseen series (Garza et al., 2023).
Similarly, for tabular data, Transformers pre-trained
on a diverse collection of tables can perform infer-
ence on new, smaller tables without task-specific fine-
tuning (Badaro et al., 2023; Hollmann et al., 2025). In
finance, by framing order flow as a structured language
of market events, our approach aligns with this proven
paradigm, arguing for its direct applicability to the
unique challenges of financial data.
A.2. The T ransformer as a Natural Fit
The Transformer architecture is uniquely suited to address these challenges. Its core components map naturally
to the fundamental properties of order flow data:
• Self-Attention: The attention mechanism is designed to capture complex, long-range dependencies within
a sequence. This makes it an ideal tool for modeling the long memory and intricate, non-linear interactions
inherent in order flow.
• Sequence-to-Sequence Framework: As an autoregressive, sequence-based model, the Transformer
inherently handles the asynchronous, event-driven nature of the data, where the time between events is itself
a feature to be learned.
• Adapting to Multi-feature Sequences: While Transformers excel at processing univariate text, our trade
events are multi-feature tuples. A key challenge is thus to effectively discretize and tokenize these mixed-type
features into a processable sequence, which motivates our novel tokenization and embedding methodology.
We develop an end-to-end methodology to build TradeFM, a generative foundation model for market microstructure.
The following four sections detail each component of our pipeline: our data processing and scale-invariant feature
engineering (Section 5), our universal tokenization scheme (Section 6), the TradeFM model architecture (Section 7),
and the closed-loop market simulator used for evaluation (Section 8).
A.3. Mid-Price Estimation
A robust estimate of the true market mid-price ( pmid
t ) is critical for normalizing price-related features. While
dedicated market data sources for this exist, they are often expensive. Given our access to raw transaction data,
we seek to estimate this value directly. In our partial-information setting, we primarily observe the execution
prices (p exec
t ) for consummated trades. The raw stream ofp exec
t is a noisy version of the true mid-pricep mid
t .
A naive approach, such as a simple rolling average of execution prices, is insufficient. A fixed-width window of
trades is not comparable across assets with different liquidity levels; a 50-trade window may span less than a
second for a highly liquid asset but several hours for an illiquid one. A time-based window (e.g., 2 seconds) is
more relevant, but a simple average still fails to account for trade volume. For example, an average that gives
equal weight to a 1,000-share trade at$10.00 and a 1-share trade at$9.00 would produce a misleading estimate.
15


[Page 16]
T radeFM: A Generative F oundation Model for T rade-flow and Market Microstructure
Time- Time- Asset A vg. Daily Midprice Action Side Order V ol.
step stamp V ol. (shs) ($) Price ($) (shs)
...
42 09:45:30 AAPL 53,496,022 182.45 ADD BUY 182.44 500
43 09:45:38 AAPL 53,496,022 182.48 ADD SELL 182.50 750
44 09:45:52 AAPL 53,496,022 182.50 CANCEL BUY 182.49 300
...
Table 4.Example trade sequence.Toy example of trading activity for an imaginary AAPL sequence, demonstrating
the multi-feature and heterogeneous nature of our data pre-tokenization.
The conventional solution to this problem is the volume-weighted average price (VW AP), which is
ˆpVW AP
t =
∑W
i=0vt−ipexec
t−i
∑W
i=0vt−i
(2)
To make this estimator more reactive to recent information, we introduceExponentially-W eighted V olume-
W eighted A verage Price (EW-VW AP). This is calculated by maintaining two separate exponential moving
averages (EMAs): one for the volume-weighted price and one for the volume itself. For each incoming trade
with execution price pexec
t and volume vt, we update the EMAs for the numerator ( Nt) and denominator ( Dt) as
follows:
Nt =α·(pexec
t ·vt) + (1−α)·Nt−1
Dt =α·vt + (1−α)·Dt−1
The EW-VW AP at timetis then the ratio of these two values:
ˆpEW-VW AP
t = Nt
Dt
(3)
The smoothing factor αis determined by a time-based halflife, ensuring that the estimate gives more weight to
larger and more recent trades in a temporally consistent manner. This provides a stable and representative price
benchmark that reflects the price at which the bulk of recent market activity has occurred. This estimator is
used throughout the paper to normalize all price-related features to a common scale.
A.4. T okenization Example
Given the imaginary sequence of trade events et constructed in Table 4, our features for timestep t = 43 are as
follows:
•∆t t =w t−wt−1 = 09:45:38−09:45:30 = 8sec
•δpt = porder
t −ˆpmid
t
ˆpmid
t
= $182.50−$182.48
$182.48 = $0.02
$182.48 = 0.011% = +1.1 bps
•v t = 750shs
•a t = Add Order
•s t = Sell
Using our calibrated bins, we would discretize these features to the bin indices:
•i ∆t t = bin 11
•i δpt = bin 7
•i vt = bin 7
•i at = bin 0
•i st = bin 1
Using Equation 1 would yield:
16


[Page 17]
T radeFM: A Generative F oundation Model for T rade-flow and Market Microstructure
Figure 8.Mid-price estimator comparison.Our proposed EW-VW AP provides a more stable and responsive estimate
than standard VW AP or EWM, closely tracking the executed fill prices across different time scales and liquidity regimes.
17


[Page 18]
T radeFM: A Generative F oundation Model for T rade-flow and Market Microstructure
itrade = 6011
Assuming an opening pricep 0 = $179.50, we would have change in price level feature:
∆pt = ˆpmid
t −p0
p0
= $182.48−$179.50
$179.50 = 1.66% = +166 bps
Discretizing this using our bins would give i∆p t = 19. Based on the asset’s average daily volume of 53 million,
which falls into the high liquidity bin, our liquidity indicator il would be 2. If this sequence was a market-level
sequence, we would have market-participant indicatorI MP = 0.
Our final model input would then be:
[il,IMP,i ∆p t,i trade] = [2,0,19,6011].
Model Size Num.
T rain T okens
Batch
Size GPUs T rain Time
/ Epoch (hrs) Optimization
125M 2.6B 24 3xA100 17 Accelerate
250M 6.4B 32 4xA10G 29 DeepSpeed (Rajbhandari et al., 2020)
500M 10.7B 24 3xA100 128 Accelerate
Table 5.T raining configuration.Setup details for different model sizes, including token counts, batch sizes, hardware,
and training time per epoch.
B. Reproducibility Guide
B.1. Model Backbone
TradeFM is a decoder-only Transformer, trained from scratch with a custom configuration. The architecture
is based on the Llama family (Touvron et al., 2023) and incorporates modern enhancements for efficiency and
performance, including:
• Grouped-Query Attention (GQA): Balances the performance of Multi-Head Attention with the reduced
memory bandwidth of Multi-Query Attention, enabling faster inference and larger batch sizes.
• Rotary Position Embeddings (RoPE): Encodes relative positional information by applying a rotation
to query and key vectors, which has been shown to improve generalization for long sequences.
B.2. Model Hyperparameters and Scaling
The model size is guided by the Chinchilla scaling laws, which prescribe a compute-optimal balance between model
size and unique training tokens, implying approximately 20 tokens per parameter (Kaplan et al., 2020; Hoffmann
et al., 2022). Given our dataset of 10.7 billion unique tokens, this implies a target model size of around 525
million parameters. We note that our 4-epoch training schedule means the model sees approximately 42.8B total
tokens, exceeding this ratio with repeated data; this follows recommendations for training in data-constrained
regimes (Muennighoff et al., 2023). Our final hyperparameters are as follows:
•Context Length: 1,024 tokens
•Hidden Layers: 32
•Embedding Dimension: 1,024
•Intermediate MLP Size: 4,096
•Attention Heads: 32
•Key-V alue Heads (GQA): 8 heads, 4 groups
•T otal Parameters: 524.4 Million
The 1:4 ratio between the embedding dimension and the intermediate MLP size is chosen in accordance with best
practices for Transformer models (Petty et al., 2024).
18


[Page 19]
T radeFM: A Generative F oundation Model for T rade-flow and Market Microstructure
B.3. T raining Configuration
We train the model on an A WS instance with 3 Nvidia A100 GPUs, each with 80GB of RAM. All training is
performed in fp16 half-precision. To achieve an effective batch size of 4,032, we use a per-device batch size
of 24 and gradient accumulation over 56 steps. For further memory optimization and training acceleration,
we use the Accelerate library. The model is trained using the AdamW optimizer with a linear learning rate
schedule, a learning rate of 5 ×10−5, and 500 steps of warmup. Following recommendations for training on large
datasets (Muennighoff et al., 2023), we train for a total of 4 epochs.
Due to compute constraints, different model sizes in memory, and different dataset sizes implied by Chinchilla
scaling laws, our training setups vary slightly between model sizes. We summarize these variations in Table 5.
(a)T radeFM-500M learning curve.A verage token
negative log likelihood over the test set constituting Jan.
through Sept. 2025.
(b)Perplexity vs. epochs.Out-of-sample perplexity for
all TradeFM models. Epoch 1 represents one pass over the
entire dataset; subsequent training is on repeated data.
Figure 9.T raining dynamics.(a) Learning curve for TradeFM-500M. (b) Out-of-sample perplexity across model sizes
and epochs.
19


[Page 20]
T radeFM: A Generative F oundation Model for T rade-flow and Market Microstructure
B.4. T okenizer Pseudocode
Algorithm 1Tokenizer Pseudocode
Input:Flattened trading data with features: price, volume, time, action, side, participant
Input:Bin counts:N price,N depth,N volume,N time,N side = 2,N action = 2
1:foreach featurefin{price, depth, volume, time}do
2:Remove NaN and infinite values fromf
3:Compute upper outlier thresholdu= percentile(f,99)
4:iffeature is double-sidedthen
5:Compute lower outlier thresholdl= percentile(f,1)
6:Assign values outside [l,u] to lower / upper outlier bins
7:else
8:Assign values aboveuto upper outlier bin
9:end if
10:ifusing equal-frequency binsthen
11:Compute bin edgesB f using quantile binning withN f bins
12:else
13:Compute bin edgesB f using histogram binning withN f bins
14:end if
15:Digitizefinto bin indicesI f usingB f
16:Handle outliers: assign out-of-range values to edge bins as needed
17:end for
18:foreach categorical featurecin{action, side, participant}do
19:Map each category to a unique integer indexI c
20:end for
21:foreach orderoin the datasetdo
22:foreach featurefdo
23:ifo[f] is NaNthen
24:Imputeo[f] with a random valid bin index or default value
25:end if
26:end for
27:Compute token index foro:
28:T o =I action×Nside×Ndepth×Nvolume×Ntime
29:+I side×Ndepth×Nvolume×Ntime
30:+I depth×Nvolume×Ntime
31:+I volume×Ntime
32:+I time
33:AssignT o to ordero
34:end for
20


[Page 21]
T radeFM: A Generative F oundation Model for T rade-flow and Market Microstructure
B.5. Market Simulation Pseudocode
Algorithm 2Market Simulator: Part 1 - Initialization and Utilities
Input:Sequence of order transactions, initial pricep 0, simulation parameters
1:Initialize Exchange:
2:Set initial pricep 0
3:Initialize order book, midprice, fills, deletes, spreads, bid/ask volumes
4:F unction:InitializeOrderBook(order columns)
5:Reset order book, midprice, fills, deletes, spreads, bid/ask volumes
6:Set initial bid/ask top 0
7:F unction:GetOrderPrice(transaction)
8:iforder is marketthen
9:ifside is Sellthen
10:price←lowest ask
11:else
12:price←highest bid
13:end if
14:else
15:price←(order price depth / 10,000)×current midprice + current midprice
16:end if
17:Returnprice
18:F unction:GenerateFill(best past order, order, quantity)
19:Compute time since best past order
20:Determine match price:
21:ifboth orders are marketthen
22:price←current midprice
23:else iforder is marketthen
24:price←best past order price
25:else ifbest past order is marketthen
26:price←order price
27:else
28:price←best past order price
29:end if
30:Returnfill record with IDs, sides, prices, depths, volume, time delta
21


[Page 22]
T radeFM: A Generative F oundation Model for T rade-flow and Market Microstructure
Algorithm 3Market Simulator: Part 2 - Simulation Step Functions
F unction:StepOrderBook(order)
Extract side and price from order
whileorder volume>0do
Find matching opposite-side orders based on price-time priority
ifno matching ordersthen
break
end if
Select best matching order (highest bid or lowest ask)
ifbest past order volume>order volumethen
Reduce best past order volume by order volume
Record fill andreturn
else ifbest past order volume<order volumethen
Reduce order volume by best past order volume
Remove best past order from book
Record fill
else
Record fill
Remove best past order from book
return
end if
end while
iforder volume>0then
Add partially filled order to book
end if
F unction:StepMidprice(transaction)
iftransaction is Deletethen
Use current order book
else
Add transaction to temporary order book
end if
Update highest bid and lowest ask from book
Compute midprice as average of highest bid and lowest ask
Record midprice and bid/ask volumes
F unction:StepSim(transaction)
Update transaction midprice
ifaction is Addthen
Compute order price
Update midprice
Step order book
else ifaction is Deletethen
Match on order ID
Remove matching orders and record deletes
Update midprice
end if
Record simulation time for profiling
F unction:RunSimulation(data)
Initialize order book
foreach transaction in datado
StepSim(transaction)
end for
Returnfills and midprice history
22


[Page 23]
T radeFM: A Generative F oundation Model for T rade-flow and Market Microstructure
B.6. Zero-Intelligence Baseline
The Zero-Intelligence (ZI) agent is a canonical null model used to test whether a model learns complex, conditional
dynamics beyond the market’s basic structural properties (Gode & Sunder, 1993; Farmer et al., 2005). To provide
a fair baseline, our ZI agent generates orders stochastically by sampling from distributions calibrated to match
the marginals of key features in a 450-million-trade sample of the training data.
Specifically, side and action type are sampled from their empirical categorical distributions; interarrival time is
sampled from a fitted Exponential distribution; order volume from a fitted Exponential distribution; and price
depth is drawn from a Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM).
The resulting ZI agent orders are processed through the identical market simulator and evaluation pipeline as
TradeFM to ensure a direct and fair comparison. We compute 2,048 rollouts of 1,024 events, and compute the
same stylized facts.
B.7. Compound Hawkes Baseline
Hawkes Processes are commonly applied to market data for their ability to robustly model interarrival times
of self-exciting events (Bacry et al., 2015; Jain et al., 2024). We adopt the Compound Hawkes model which
combines a Hawkes process for modeling interarrival times with empirical distributions for modeling additional
event features like volume and price depth. We use the same 450-million-trade data as is used to train our
zero-intelligence baseline, and separate the data based on action and side.
We then fit a Hawkes process using a sum of exponential kernel, with 4 dimensions, one for each combination
of action and side (buy-delete, buy-add, sell-delete, sell-add). For each of these action-side combinations we
calibrate a Gaussian Mixture Model for price depths, and an Exponential for volume.
C. Scaling Analysis
Figure 10.Scaling law analysis.Test loss (negative log likelihood) on held-out data one month in advance of the
training data cutoff. The black dashed line represents the power law fit to the minimum loss frontier.
To substantiate theFoundation Modelclaim, we conducted a comprehensive scaling analysis of our approach. We
trained models at three scales: approximately 125M, 250M, and 500M parameters.
Our500M parameter modelis our largest model and serves as the primary evaluation target throughout
this paper. The scaling law plots in Figure 10 demonstrate expected power-law relationships between compute,
dataset size, and test loss. These plots include repeated data, as we train for four epochs. We verify this by
computing the minimum loss frontier for compute and dataset size, fitting power laws to find that the test loss
L(C) with respect to compute in FlopsC, andL(D) with respect to dataset size in tokensD, follow:
L(C)∝C−αC, αC≈0.18
L(D)∝D−αD, αD≈0.19.
23


[Page 24]
T radeFM: A Generative F oundation Model for T rade-flow and Market Microstructure
While 500M is small relative to general-purpose LLMs, it is large for the Financial Microstructure domain, and
comparable in scale to other domain-specific models such as MaRS ( ∼1B parameters). Standard SOTA models in
this field typically have <10M parameters (e.g., DeepLOB (60K params) and LOBS5 (6.3M params)). TradeFM
represents a>50×increase in model capacityover existing domain-specific baselines.
D. Extended Experimental Results
D.1. Geographic Zero-Shot Generalization
We evaluate the model, trained exclusively on US equities, on a hold-out set of assets from APAC markets (China
and Japan). We detail these held-out datasets in Table 6. Figure 5 shows the distribution of perplexity scores for
one month of data (held out for all geographies), with significant overlap between US and APAC. The minimal
degradation in perplexity on unseen markets confirms TradeFM’s generalization capabilities.
Country Number of Assets Date-Asset Pairs T okens
US 6,885 81,203 857,017,219
China 4,926 68,925 37,408,529
Japan 2,932 37,235 286,476,052
Table 6.Geographic held-out datasets.Dataset statistics for US, China, and Japan. All geographies are evaluated on
Jan. 2025 data.
D.2. Simulator V alidation
In order to evaluate the simulator, we replay sequences of real orders through it and compare the statistical
properties of the resulting simulated trade fills against the real fills from our historical data. We focus on two
key metrics: the cumulative distribution function (CDF) of fill volumes and the CDF of lot counts (the number
of discrete fills required to complete a single order). As shown in Figure 11, we find a strong correspondence
between the real and simulated distributions across assets of varying liquidity, confirming that our simulator is a
high-fidelity environment for evaluation. We find correlations of 0.91 and 0.98 between sim and real volumes and
lot counts, respectively.
Figure 11.Simulator fill validation.Stylized facts of market simulator fills: (left) fill volumes; (right) lot counts.
Correlations between simulated and actual fills are 0.91 for volumes and 0.98 for lot counts.
D.3. T emporal Drift
As financial markets are dynamic and market regimes are constantly changing, we investigate the tendency of
model performance to drift over time. Our tokenizer’s main contribution is to standardize representations of
market features over both the liquidity and time regime.
In Figure 12 we demonstrate the universality of these features by exploring the distribution of our relative price
level, relative price depth, interarrival time, and volume features in both the month used to calibrate our tokenizer,
Feb. 2024, and one year later in Feb. 2025. We observe that our features are stationary over this period even as
24


[Page 25]
T radeFM: A Generative F oundation Model for T rade-flow and Market Microstructure
Figure 12.F eature stationarity over time.Kernel-density estimation of feature distributions from the tokenizer
calibration period of Feb. 2024 to one year later in Feb. 2025. Our feature engineering successfully makes these features
stationary, enabling generalization to out-of-distribution temporal regimes.
25


[Page 26]
T radeFM: A Generative F oundation Model for T rade-flow and Market Microstructure
volatility, price level, and other market conditions vary. Figure 13 shows the Kolmogorov-Smirnov and Wasserstein
distance of each of these features between the tokenizer calibration month and each of 9 held-out months. We
include a non-stationary feature, raw mid-price, to contextualize the stationarity of these metrics.
Figure 13.T okenizer drift over months.Kolmogorov-Smirnov and Wasserstein distances between feature distributions
during the tokenizer calibration month and held-out months. Raw mid-price, a non-stationary feature, is included for
context. (OPD and IA Time in the legend correspond to Price Depth and Interarrival Time, respectively.)
In Figure 14 we extend the aggregated results in Table 3 for all quantities of interest. We observe that while
these metrics do vary within a range, the variance is small and our method mostly achieves higher fidelity than
baselines.
D.4. Synthetic Data Generation
TradeFM can serve as an engine for generating high-fidelity, privacy-preserving synthetic financial data. The
realism of the generated data is validated not only at the level of emergent price dynamics (Figure 4), but also at
the granular level of individual orders. As shown in Figure 15, the distributions of simulated order volumes and
interarrival times closely match the power-law and exponential distributions observed in real data, respectively.
This high-fidelity generation is valuable for:
• Backtesting T rading Strategies: Synthetic data allows for robust testing of trading algorithms against a
wide range of plausible market scenarios, reducing the risk of overfitting to a single historical path (Potluru
et al., 2024).
• Augmenting Sparse Datasets: For illiquid assets where historical data is sparse, the model can generate
additional data to facilitate more robust analysis and model training.
• Privacy-Preserving Data Sharing: The model can generate realistic datasets for academic or public use
without revealing sensitive, proprietary transaction information.
D.5. Market Simulation & Stress T esting
The integrated TradeFM-simulator system functions as a high-fidelity environment for complex “what-if” analyses
and stress testing. This allows for the study of systemic risk and market stability in a controlled environment.
The ability to generate plausible, multi-step forecasts of future market trajectories, as illustrated in Figure 16, is
a direct outcome of this closed-loop simulation capability.
Such systems are also useful to regulators and risk managers (Dwarakanath et al., 2024), who can use this system
to simulate the market’s response to extreme or counterfactual scenarios, such as by injecting large, anomalous
orders into a historical context and observing the resulting price trajectory. Figure 17 demonstrates this capability
– for a sample asset, we artificially inject buy or sell orders at 10x the frequency found in the real context, and
average mid-price forecasts over 10 rollouts. When we inject artificial sell orders, the mid-price drops, and when
we inject buy orders, the mid-price rises, illustrating realistic behavior.
26


[Page 27]
T radeFM: A Generative F oundation Model for T rade-flow and Market Microstructure
Figure 14.Distributional fidelity over time.Wasserstein distance and Kolmogorov-Smirnov statistic of feature
distributions and emergent market factors from various methods over nine held-out months.
27


[Page 28]
T radeFM: A Generative F oundation Model for T rade-flow and Market Microstructure
Figure 15.Order-level distributional fidelity .(Top) Simulated order volumes follow the power-law observed in real
data. (Bottom) Simulated interarrival times match the exponential distribution of real data.
Figure 16.Multi-step mid-price forecast.Rollout-based forecast for an imaginary asset initially priced at$100. The
average trajectory and 50% confidence interval over 256 simulations show the model generates plausible, non-stationary
market paths.
28


[Page 29]
T radeFM: A Generative F oundation Model for T rade-flow and Market Microstructure
Figure 17.Counterfactual stress testing.The model’s generated price path responds realistically to injected anomalous
order flow (10x normal frequency), demonstrating its utility for impact analysis.
D.6. Multi-Agent Modeling & RL Fine-T uning
Our system provides a high-fidelity, interactive environment for training and evaluating sophisticated, learning-
based agents. The pre-trained TradeFM can serve as a realistic “background” market, generating plausible and
reactive counterparty order flow. This creates a dynamic training ground for:
• Reinforcement Learning (RL) for Optimal Execution: RL agents can be trained to learn optimal
strategies for executing large orders by interacting with the simulated market, minimizing costs such as price
impact and the bid-ask spread.
• Multi-Agent Systems (MAS): The simulator can be populated with multiple, heterogeneous learning-
based agents to study the emergent, collective behaviors and potential instabilities that arise from their
interactions. The participant-level conditioning of our model provides a natural and powerful mechanism for
initializing and fine-tuning diverse agent policies within such a system.
29